The AI Risk Repository
March 2026
Published at  10.1016/j.patter.2026.101517 
Peter Slattery, Alexander Saeri, Emily Grundy, Jess Graham,
Michael Noetel, Risto Uuk, James Dao, Soroush Pour,
Stephen Casper, and Neil Thompson
A meta-review, database, and taxonomy
of risks from artificial intelligence
MIT AI Risk 
Initiative

 
 
 
The AI Risk Repository: A Meta-Review, 
Database, and Taxonomy of Risks From 
Artificial Intelligence 
Published version: This paper has been published in Patterns (Cell Press, 2026) under a CC BY 4.0 
licence. Please cite the published version: 
Slattery, P., Saeri, A. K., Grundy, E. A. C., Graham, J., Noetel, M., Uuk, R., Dao, J., Pour, S., Casper, S., 
& Thompson, N. (2026). The AI Risk Repository: A meta-review, database, and taxonomy of risks 
from artificial intelligence. Patterns, 101517. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2026.101517 
The living database is available at airisk.mit.edu. 
Peter Slattery1, Alexander K. Saeri1,2 , Emily A. C. Grundy1,2, Jess Graham1,2, Michael Noetel1,2*, Risto 
Uuk3,4, James Dao5, Soroush Pour5, Stephen Casper6, and Neil Thompson1. 
1MIT FutureTech, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 
2School of Psychology, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia 
3Future of Life Institute, Brussels 1040, Belgium 
4KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium 
5Harmony Intelligence, Sydney, Australia 
6Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 
Peter Slattery 
 0000-0002-6083-378X 
Alexander K. Saeri 
 0000-0001-9254-0300 
Emily A. C. Grundy 
 0000-0002-9633-1116 
Jess Graham 
 0009-0003-9650-2792 
Michael Noetel 
 0000-0002-6563-8203 
Risto Uuk 
 0000-0002-2933-4608 
James Dao 
 0000-0003-2596-9531 
Soroush Pour 
 0009-0003-6156-5654 
Stephen Casper 
 0000-0003-0084-1937 
Neil Thompson 
 0000-0001-9888-573X 
* Corresponding Author and Lead Contact: m.noetel@uq.edu.au; The University of Queensland, St 
Lucia, Queensland, 4072, Australia 
 

 
 
2 
Summary 
The risks posed by Artificial Intelligence concern academics, auditors, policymakers, AI companies, 
and the public. Researchers, policymakers, and technology companies discuss AI risks using 
inconsistent terminology—the same word may describe different problems, while different words 
describe identical concerns. This fragmentation impedes coordinated responses to AI challenges. 
We address this by creating the AI Risk Repository: a living database of 1,725 risks extracted from 
74 existing taxonomies and frameworks. We organise these risks using two complementary 
classification systems. The Causal Taxonomy classifies risks by their origins: which entity causes 
them (human or AI), whether intentional, and when they occur (before or after deployment). The 
Domain Taxonomy classifies risks by their effects across seven areas, from discrimination and 
privacy violations to misinformation and weapons development. This shared reference enables 
more coordinated approaches to discussing, researching, auditing, and governing AI systems 
across sectors and jurisdictions. 
Keywords 
AI governance; societal impact of AI; AI safety; risk assessment; machine learning governance 
Introduction 
For humanity to reap the benefits of AI, it must understand and address its risks. The range of 
possible risks is wide, from plagiarism 1 to pandemics 2. Understanding and categorizing AI risks is 
fundamental to technological forecasting and anticipating the societal trajectory of artificial 
intelligence. As AI systems become increasingly autonomous and capable, the ability to forecast 
their potential impacts requires a comprehensive understanding of the risk landscape. Naturally, 
these risks have drawn considerable attention from academics, regulators, policymakers, and the 
public 3–6. However, that broad attention has led to a diverse and disparate set of taxonomies, 
classifications, and other lists of AI risks. This paper aims to collate all of these taxonomies and 
harmonize them into one living resource to hold and organize those risks. 
Having a range of partially overlapping risk frameworks can lead to confusion and hide 
vulnerabilities. For example, organizations developing AI models may present risk-mitigation plans 
that lack detail 7 or address relatively few risks cf. 8–10. Similarly, risk evaluators may be less able to 
comprehensively evaluate and report on AI risks without a clear understanding of the full range of 
threats cf. 11. A full taxonomy can help companies, governments, and model developers prioritize 
and know where to place controls. 
Another challenge arising from multiple, overlapping frameworks is the conceptual ambiguity akin 
to psychology’s ‘jingle jangle fallacies’ 12, where people use the same name for different risks, or 
different names for the same risk. For example, “privacy” might refer to a model’s ability to leak 
sensitive information from the training data 13 or being free from government surveillance 14, which 
are very different risks. Our repository addresses this by providing a richer clustering of risk terms, 
mapping how different frameworks carve up the risk landscape and enabling practitioners to 
identify which specific risks underlie broader categories. We aim to provide additional structure 

 
 
3 
that supports cross-framework comparison and comprehensive coverage. Shared understanding 
can reduce confusion and promote research usage, cross-study comparison, and the development 
of cumulative knowledge e.g., 15,16. Coherent frameworks are also important in legal, political, and 
practical settings, where they are often cited as goals for regulatory processes 17. For example, the 
U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council (TTC) stated in its joint roadmap for Trustworthy AI and 
Risk Management, “Shared terminologies and taxonomies are essential for operationalizing 
trustworthy AI and risk management in an interoperable fashion” 18. 
Previous attempts to find shared understanding have usually drawn from narrative reviews, rather 
than the result of a systematic search. The few systematic reviews that exist for exceptions: 19,20have 
focused on specific categories of AI system (generative AI and Artificial General Intelligence [AGI], 
respectively) rather than risks from AI systems broadly. Existing taxonomies vary considerably in 
their adherence to best practice criteria for classification systems 21. We observed that many 
taxonomies prioritise comprehensiveness over mutual exclusivity (with risks spanning multiple 
categories), while others achieve parsimony at the cost of exhaustive coverage. Few taxonomies 
describe explicit revision processes, and most are descriptive rather than explanatory in 
orientation. The number of competing taxonomies inadvertently makes it challenging to integrate 
relevant research into a cohesive shared understanding.  
In this paper, we aim to address these limitations. We systematically reviewed existing AI risk 
classifications, frameworks, and taxonomies. We extracted the categories and subcategories of 
risks from included reports into a living database that we have updated over time. We applied a 
“best fit” framework synthesis approach 22,23 to develop two complementary taxonomies. The 
Causal Taxonomy captures antecedent conditions for risk: which entity's actions led to the risk, 
whether intentional, and when in the development lifecycle it occurs. The Domain Taxonomy 
captures consequent harms: the domains of impact such as loss of control, weapons 
development, privacy, economic harm, and so on. Together, these taxonomies allow risks to be 
classified by both their origins and their effects. We sought to rigorously extract AI risk 
frameworks into a comprehensive, extensible, and categorized risk database. It creates a 
foundation for a more coherent and complete approach to managing the risks posed by AI 
systems.  
This work makes several theoretical contributions to technological forecasting and social change. 
First, we provide a comprehensive empirical foundation for theories of emerging technology risk by 
systematically analyzing 74 frameworks encompassing 1,725 distinct risks. This moves beyond 
single-framework approaches to create a meta-theoretical structure for understanding 
technological risk. 
Second, our dual-taxonomy approach—combining causal and domain-based classifications—
advances theoretical understanding of how technological risks emerge and manifest in society. 
The Causal Taxonomy provides a descriptive framework for categorising how existing taxonomies 
attribute risk sources. We understand this framework simplifies a more complex reality: many risks 
emerge from interactions between human decisions and AI system behaviours rather than from 
either in isolation 24. Our ‘Other’ category (21% of coded risks) captures cases where this 
attribution was ambiguous or explicitly interactional, though existing taxonomies rarely theorised 
these interaction effects explicitly. 

 
 
4 
Third, we found that certain risk categories appear in relatively few frameworks (e.g., AI welfare 
appeared in 3% of frameworks; multi-agent risks in 7%). This suggests that future taxonomies 
might need to expand coverage as new risks like these are identified. 
Results 
Systematic literature search 
We retrieved 17,288 unique articles from our searches and expert consultations. Of these records, 
we screened 7,945. We excluded 9,343 via our stopping criteria while using ASReview, which used 
machine learning to determine when further screening was unlikely to yield relevant content. We 
assessed the full text of 91 articles. A total of 43 articles and reports met the eligibility criteria: 21 
from our search, 13 from forwards and backwards searching, and 9 from expert suggestions (see 
Figure 1). A database of included records and extracted data is available on the Open Science 
Framework 25. 
Ongoing expert consultation 
In the period May 2024-March 2025, we received recommendations to consider 44 documents. Of 
those, 22 met eligibility criteria. Between March 2025 and December 2025, we received 78 
document recommendations and included 9 that met criteria. 
Characteristics of included documents 
We included 74 documents: 25 peer-reviewed articles, 26 preprints, 8 conference papers, 15 
reports. We mainly identified recent literature, with all but five (93%) of the included documents 
published later than 2020.  
The included documents varied in the type or scope of Artificial Intelligence they focused on. In 
most cases, the type of AI was not explicitly defined (n = 27). Large language model was the next 
most common (n = 13), followed by Generative AI (n = 10), General-purpose AI (n = 8), Artificial 
General Intelligence (n = 4) and Machine Learning (n = 3). Other terms included “AI and Machine 
Learning” (always described in the document as “AI/ML”), AI assistant, algorithmic systems, 
frontier AI, advanced AI, conversational agents and embodied AI.  
Together, the included documents presented a total of 1,725 risk categories (e.g., “Privacy risks”) 
or sub-categories of risk (e.g.,  “Compromising privacy by leaking sensitive information” 26). Not all 
documents presented eligible risk categories in sufficient detail to allow us to code them with our 
taxonomies; two included documents were not coded as having any distinct risk categories or 
framework e.g., 27,28 so were not extracted. Our supplementary materials also include a database of 
all risks and included documents and frameworks (Supplementary Tables S1 and S10). 

 
 
5 
Figure 1. PRISMA Flow Diagram for Systematic Literature Search, Ongoing 
Expert Consultation, and Screening 
Flow diagram illustrating the identification, screening, eligibility assessment, and inclusion of 
documents for the AI Risk Repository. The left pathway shows the systematic literature search, 
which identified 17,288 unique records from database searching (n = 13,171) and 
forwards/backwards searching with initial expert consultation (n = 4,192). Title and abstract 
screening using ASReview software reduced this to 91 full-text documents, of which 43 met 
inclusion criteria. The right pathway shows ongoing expert consultation (May 2024–December 
2025), which identified 122 additional documents through recommendations, with 31 meeting 
inclusion criteria after full-text review. Combined, 74 documents were included in the final analysis. 
Exclusion reasons at the full-text stage included focus on risk assessment processes rather than 
risk classification, focus on single risk categories, wrong document type, and documents that were 
not original AI risk frameworks. 
 
Note. *The ASReview software was used to assist in screening titles and abstracts from searches. 
Causal Taxonomy of AI Risks 
We created our taxonomies using a best-fit framework synthesis. To create the Causal Taxonomy 
of AI Risks (Table 1), we selected and iterated on a taxonomy of causal factors 29. This taxonomy 
Screened title & abstract
(n = 7,945)
Documents included (n = 43)
Records identified through 
database searching (n = 13171)
Unique records after duplicates 
removed  (n = 17288)
Reviewed full-text (n = 91)
Forwards and backwards 
searching and initial expert 
consultation (n = 4192)
IDENTIFICATION
SCREENING
Records excluded by ASReview 
stopping rules (n = 9,343)
ELIGIBILITY
INCLUDED
Full-text documents 
excluded (n = 48):
13 Focused on risk assessment 
process 
3 Focused on AI tool 
5 Focused on single risk 
3 Focused on sources of AI risk
24 Not an AI risk framework 
Records excluded* (n = 17,197)
Records identified through ongoing 
expert consultation (n = 122)
Total documents included (n = 74)
Full-text documents 
excluded (n = 91):
16 Duplicate of included document
16 Focused on risk assessment process
7 Focused on specific risk category 
2 Not cross-cutting
8 Wrong document type
38 Not an AI risk framework
4 Not an original framework
SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE SEARCH
ONGOING EXPERT CONSULTATION
Documents included (n = 31)

 
 
6 
uses Entity, Intent, and Timing to classify risks in the AI Risk Database. We coded 1,480 of the 
1,725 (86%) potential risks extracted from our documents against the Causal Taxonomy. 136 did 
not present sufficient information to assess the Entity, Intent, or Timing, and 87 were discarded as 
they did not fit our definition of risk (e.g., where a previous taxonomy said “Governance - 
Regulation” without describing how the regulation itself was a risk 19). Other reasons included the 
risk descriptions being too broad to code (e.g., ‘damage to political and economic institutions’). In 
supplementary materials, we provide detailed descriptions of each causal taxonomy variable 
(Supplemental Notes S1), report the iterative development of the best-fit taxonomy (Supplemental 
Notes S3), and coverage of the included documents across the Causal Taxonomy (Supplementary 
Tables S2, S3, and S4). 
Table 1. Causal Taxonomy of AI Risks 
The Causal Taxonomy classifies AI risks according to three categories of antecedent factors. 
Entity specifies whether the risk is caused by decisions or actions made by humans, by AI systems, 
or arises from human-AI interaction (or is ambiguously specified). Intent specifies whether the risk 
occurs as an expected outcome (intentional) or unexpected outcome (unintentional) of pursuing a 
goal, or is presented without clear specification of intentionality. Timing specifies whether the risk 
occurs before deployment (pre-deployment), after the AI model has been trained and deployed 
(post-deployment), or spans both phases (or is unspecified). Each risk is classified under exactly 
one level within each category. Of 1,725 extracted risks, 1,480 (86%) contained sufficient 
information to be coded against this taxonomy. See also Supplementary Table S1 for the full 
distribution of risks across taxonomy categories. 
Category 
Level 
Description 
Entity 
Human 
The risk is caused by a decision or action made by humans 
AI 
The risk is caused by a decision or action made by an AI system 
Other 
The risk arises from human-AI interaction rather than either agent alone, 
or the causing entity is ambiguous or unspecified 
Intent 
Intentional 
The risk occurs due to an expected outcome from pursuing a goal 
Unintentional 
The risk occurs due to an unexpected outcome from pursuing a goal 
Other 
The risk is presented as occurring without clearly specifying the intentionality 
Timing 
Pre-deployment 
The risk occurs before the AI is deployed 
Post-deployment 
The risk occurs after the AI model has been trained and deployed 
Other 
The risk occurs across both pre- and post-deployment phases, or 
is presented without a clearly specified time of occurrence 
Domain Taxonomy of AI Risks 
To create the Domain Taxonomy of AI Risks, we used the best-fit framework synthesis to iterate on 
a taxonomy of categories of AI risk 26. This taxonomy catalogs hazards and harms associated with 
AI. We coded 1,506 (87%) of the 1,725 potential risks extracted from our documents against the 
Domain Taxonomy. As above, the rest did not contain the necessary details or did not fit our 
definition of ‘risk’.  

 
 
7 
In Table 2, we present the Domain Taxonomy including subdomains and short descriptions of each 
subdomain. In supplementary materials, we present a detailed description of each subdomain 
using information from included documents (Supplemental Notes S2), as well as analysis of the 
distribution of risks and domains across the database (Supplementary Tables S5, S6, S7, S8, and 
S9). We also transparently report the evolution of the best-fit taxonomy.

 
 
8 
Table 2. Domain Taxonomy of AI Risks 
Domain / Subdomain 
Description 
1 Discrimination & toxicity 
 
1.1 Unfair discrimination and 
misrepresentation 
Unequal treatment of individuals or groups by AI, often based on race, gender, or other sensitive characteristics, resulting in unfair outcomes and 
unfair representation of those groups. 
1.2 Exposure to toxic content 
AI that exposes users to harmful, abusive, unsafe or inappropriate content. May involve providing advice or encouraging action. Examples of toxic 
content include hate speech, violence, extremism, illegal acts, or child sexual abuse material, as well as content that violates community norms such 
as profanity, inflammatory political speech, or pornography. 
1.3 Unequal performance 
across groups 
Accuracy and effectiveness of AI decisions and actions is dependent on group membership, where decisions in AI system design and biased 
training data lead to unequal outcomes, reduced benefits, increased effort, and alienation of users. 
2 Privacy & security 
 
2.1 Compromise of privacy by 
obtaining, leaking, or 
correctly inferring sensitive 
information 
AI systems that memorize and leak sensitive personal data or infer private information about individuals without their consent. Unexpected or 
unauthorized sharing of data and information can compromise user expectation of privacy, assist identity theft, or cause loss of confidential 
intellectual property. 
2.2 AI system security 
vulnerabilities and attacks 
Vulnerabilities that can be exploited in AI systems, software development toolchains, and hardware, resulting in unauthorized access, data and 
privacy breaches, or system manipulation causing unsafe outputs or behavior. 
3 Misinformation 
 
3.1 False or misleading 
information 
AI systems that inadvertently generate or spread incorrect or deceptive information, which can lead to inaccurate beliefs in users and undermine 
their autonomy. Humans that make decisions based on false beliefs can experience physical, emotional, or material harms 
3.2 Pollution of information 
ecosystem and loss of 
consensus reality 
Highly personalized AI-generated misinformation that creates “filter bubbles” where individuals only see what matches their existing beliefs, 
undermining shared reality and weakening social cohesion and political processes. 
4 Malicious actors & misuse 
 
4.1 Disinformation, 
surveillance, and influence 
at scale 
Using AI systems to conduct large-scale disinformation campaigns, malicious surveillance, or targeted and sophisticated automated censorship and 
propaganda, with the aim of manipulating political processes, public opinion, and behavior. 
4.2 Cyberattacks, weapon 
development or use, and 
mass harm 
Using AI systems to develop cyber weapons (e.g., by coding cheaper, more effective malware), develop new or enhance existing weapons (e.g., 
Lethal Autonomous Weapons or chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, and high-yield explosives), or use weapons to cause mass harm. 

 
 
9 
Domain / Subdomain 
Description 
4.3 Fraud, scams, and targeted 
manipulation 
Using AI systems to gain a personal advantage over others such as through cheating, fraud, scams, blackmail, or targeted manipulation of beliefs or 
behavior. Examples include AI-facilitated plagiarism for research or education, impersonating a trusted or fake individual for illegitimate financial 
benefit, or creating humiliating or sexual imagery. 
 
Domain / Subdomain 
Description 
5 Human-computer 
interaction 
 
5.1 Overreliance and unsafe 
use 
Anthropomorphizing, trusting, or relying on AI systems by users, leading to emotional or material dependence and to inappropriate relationships with 
or expectations of AI systems. Trust can be exploited by malicious actors (e.g., to harvest information or enable manipulation), or result in harm 
from inappropriate use of AI in critical situations (e.g., medical emergency). Over reliance on AI systems can compromise autonomy and weaken 
social ties. 
5.2 Loss of human agency and 
autonomy 
Delegating by humans of key decisions to AI systems, or AI systems that make decisions that diminish human control and autonomy, potentially 
leading to humans feeling disempowered, losing the ability to shape a fulfilling life trajectory, or becoming cognitively enfeebled. 
6 Socioeconomic & environmental harm 
6.1 Power centralization and 
unfair distribution of 
benefits 
AI-driven concentration of power and resources within certain entities or groups, especially those with access to or ownership of powerful AI 
systems, leading to inequitable distribution of benefits and increased societal inequality. 
6.2 Increased inequality and 
decline in employment 
quality 
Social and economic inequalities caused by widespread use of AI, such as by automating jobs, reducing the quality of employment, or producing 
exploitative dependencies between workers and their employers. 
6.3 Economic and cultural 
devaluation of human effort 
AI systems capable of creating economic or cultural value, including through reproduction of human innovation or creativity (e.g., art, music, writing, 
coding, invention), destabilizing economic and social systems that rely on human effort. The ubiquity of AI-generated content may lead to reduced 
appreciation for human skills, disruption of creative and knowledge-based industries, and homogenization of cultural experiences. 
6.4 Competitive dynamics 
Competition by AI developers or state-like actors in an AI “race” by rapidly developing, deploying, and applying AI systems to maximize strategic or 
economic advantage, increasing the risk they release unsafe and error-prone systems. 
6.5 Governance failure 
Inadequate regulatory frameworks and oversight mechanisms that fail to keep pace with AI development, leading to ineffective governance and the 
inability to manage AI risks appropriately. 
6.6 Environmental harm 
The development and operation of AI systems that cause environmental harm, such as through energy consumption of data centers or the materials 
and carbon footprints associated with AI hardware. 
 
 

 
 
10 
 
Domain / Subdomain 
Description 
7 AI system safety, failures & limitations 
7.1 AI pursuing its own goals in 
conflict with human goals 
or values 
AI systems that act in conflict with ethical standards or human goals or values, especially the goals of designers or users. These misaligned 
behaviors may be introduced by humans during design and development, such as through reward hacking and goal misgeneralisation, and may 
result in AI using dangerous capabilities such as manipulation, deception, or situational awareness to seek power, self-proliferate, or achieve other 
goals. 
7.2 AI possessing dangerous 
capabilities 
AI systems that develop, access, or are provided with capabilities that increase their potential to cause mass harm through deception, weapons 
development and acquisition, persuasion and manipulation, political strategy, cyber-offense, AI development, situational awareness, and self-
proliferation. These capabilities may cause mass harm due to malicious human actors, misaligned AI systems, or failure in the AI system. 
7.3 Lack of capability or 
robustness 
AI systems that fail to perform reliably or effectively under varying conditions, exposing them to errors and failures that can have significant 
consequences, especially in critical applications or areas that require moral reasoning. 
7.4 Lack of transparency or 
interpretability 
Challenges in understanding or explaining the decision-making processes of AI systems, which can lead to mistrust, difficulty in enforcing 
compliance standards or holding relevant actors accountable for harms, and the inability to identify and correct errors. 
7.5 AI welfare and rights 
Ethical considerations regarding the treatment of potentially sentient AI entities, including discussions around their potential rights and welfare, 
particularly as AI systems become more advanced and autonomous. 
7.6 Multi-agent risks 
Risks from multi-agent interactions due to incentives (which can lead to conflict or collusion) and/or the structure of multi-agent systems, which can 
create cascading failures, selection pressures, new security vulnerabilities, and a lack of shared information and trust.  
 
The Domain Taxonomy classifies AI risks into seven domains and 24 subdomains based on the types of hazards and harms they describe. Domain 1 
(Discrimination & toxicity) includes unfair discrimination, exposure to toxic content, and unequal performance across groups. Domain 2 (Privacy & 
security) covers privacy compromise and AI system security vulnerabilities. Domain 3 (Misinformation) addresses false information and pollution of the 
information ecosystem. Domain 4 (Malicious actors & misuse) encompasses disinformation at scale, cyberattacks and weapons, and fraud and 
manipulation. Domain 5 (Human-computer interaction) includes overreliance and loss of human agency. Domain 6 (Socioeconomic & environmental 
harm) covers power centralisation, inequality, devaluation of human effort, competitive dynamics, governance failure, and environmental harm. Domain 7 
(AI system safety, failures & limitations) addresses misalignment, dangerous capabilities, lack of robustness, lack of transparency, AI welfare, and multi-
agent risks. Unlike the Causal Taxonomy, domains are not mutually exclusive; some risks span multiple domains. Of 1,725 extracted risks, 1,506 (87%) 
were coded against this taxonomy. See also Supplementary Table S2 for subdomain descriptions with examples from included documents.

 
 
11 
Overlap Between New and Existing Taxonomies 
The Causal Taxonomy demonstrates that current frameworks cover multiple causal factors—the 
extracted risks were nearly equally attributed to AI systems (42%) versus human decisions (38%), 
and similarly distributed between intentional (35%) and unintentional (35%) causes. Frameworks 
tended to focus on post-deployment risks (62%), with fewer addressing pre-deployment risks 
(13%) and 25% either spanning both phases or not specifying timing. 
The Domain Taxonomy analysis reveals substantial variation in the comprehensiveness of existing 
frameworks. While certain domains (e.g., AI System Safety) were represented in over 75% of the 
taxonomies we reviewed, categories such as AI welfare and rights (present in only 3% of 
frameworks) and Multi-agent risks (7% of frameworks) were rarely incorporated. Frameworks 
typically addressed only a subset of risks—averaging 8 of our identified 24 subdomains, with 
coverage ranging from 1 to 20 subdomains. Such variability indicates that existing taxonomies 
generally provide partial rather than comprehensive risk categorizations, potentially leaving 
significant gaps in risk assessment and management frameworks. 
Discussion 
This paper presents attempts to rigorously curate AI risk frameworks into a comprehensive, 
extensible, and categorized risk database. We developed two taxonomies to classify 1,725 risks 
from 74 documents: the Causal Taxonomy of AI Risks (addressing how, when, and why risks 
emerge) and the Domain Taxonomy of AI Risks (categorizing risks into seven domains and 24 
subdomains). 
Our repository provides essential infrastructure for forecasting risks from emerging AI 
technologies that extend beyond current systems. The field is characterized by rapid growth—93% 
of included documents were published after 2020, with most appearing as preprints or conference 
papers. This suggests urgency in knowledge dissemination but poses challenges for coordination 
and standardization. Our extensible risk database aims to facilitate that coordination by 
continually arranging those risks into useful taxonomies. 
As AI evolves toward greater autonomy, multimodal capabilities, and agentic behaviors, new risk 
categories will emerge at the intersections of our identified domains. For instance, the 
convergence of advanced language models with robotic systems may create novel risks spanning 
our 'AI system safety, failures & limitations' and 'Human-computer interaction' domains. Multi-
agent risks appeared in only 7% of current frameworks. Given the trajectory toward AI systems that 
interact autonomously with each other and with human society,30 future frameworks may benefit 
from greater attention to this category. 
The Causal Taxonomy reveals patterns in where prior frameworks anticipate risks. The distribution 
of risks in our database shows greater attention to post-deployment risks (62%) than pre-
deployment risks (13%). The appropriate distribution would depend on empirical evidence about 
risk frequency and severity that is beyond the scope of this review. Still, this distribution may 
warrant attention, because excessive focus on post-deployment risks may blind us to threats from 
development itself 31. 

 
 
12 
The Domain Taxonomy reveals uneven coverage across risk categories. While AI System Safety, 
Failures & Limitations and Socioeconomic & Environmental Harms are discussed in over 75% of 
documents, emerging areas like AI welfare and rights (3% of documents) and Multi-agent risks (7% 
of documents) are not yet integrated into frameworks, despite their potential significance as AI 
systems become more autonomous and interconnected. We hope one function of our review is to 
reduce the duplication (e.g., of new taxonomies including Socioeconomic & Environmental Harms) 
while aiming for comprehensive coverage (e.g., including emerging areas like AI welfare). 
While our repository catalogs risks, it simultaneously enables innovation by providing clear 
boundaries within which beneficial AI development can proceed. Understanding the full risk 
landscape allows developers to channel innovation toward addressing genuine human needs while 
avoiding harmful pathways. For instance, awareness of discrimination risks has spurred innovation 
in fairness-aware machine learning, while understanding of AI misalignment drives research into 
frontier model evaluations and alignment. Our comprehensive mapping reveals 'safe harbors' for 
innovation—areas where risks are well-understood and manageable—as well as frontier domains 
requiring careful exploration. By making risks explicit and categorical, we reduce uncertainty for 
innovators and investors, potentially accelerating beneficial AI deployment. The repository thus 
serves a dual function: protecting society from AI harms while enabling the realization of AI's 
transformative potential for addressing societal challenges from healthcare to climate change. 
Practical Implications for Technology Management 
Our AI Risk Repository provides concrete tools for managing AI's societal impact across multiple 
stakeholder groups: 
● For Technology Managers and AI Developers: the repository supports comprehensive risk 
assessment during AI development and deployment. Organizations can use our causal 
analysis to identify opportunities for mitigations, recognizing that many "AI risks" actually 
require human intervention during design, development, or governance phases. The 
Domain Taxonomy enables systematic risk assessment during product development 
cycles. Organizations can use our 24 subdomains as a checklist during design reviews, 
ensuring comprehensive risk consideration before deployment. We recommend integrating 
our taxonomies into existing risk management frameworks, using them to structure safety 
cases and inform resource allocation decisions. For example, the Causal Taxonomy reveals 
that 13% of identified risks relate to the pre-deployment phase. Organisations concerned 
with development-phase safety may find this subset of the repository particularly relevant 
for structuring their risk assessments. 
● For Policymakers and Regulators: the repository forms the basis for operationalizing vague 
regulatory references to "harm" and "risk." It can support compliance frameworks required 
by regulations like the EU AI Act 32 and facilitate international collaboration through shared 
terminologies—essential for initiatives like the EU-US Trade and Technology Council's 
efforts to develop interoperable AI governance 18. The repository operationalizes vague 
regulatory concepts like "high-risk AI systems" by providing 1,725 specific risk examples 
organized into actionable categories. Regulators can use the Causal Taxonomy to design 
targeted interventions—for instance, focusing on the 37% of risks attributed to human 

 
 
13 
decisions through training requirements, while addressing the 42% from AI system actions 
through technical standards. 
● For Auditors and Compliance Officers: the repository addresses a critical gap: the absence 
of comprehensive frameworks for determining when and where AI systems pose specific 
risks. Current industry risk-management frameworks often address narrow risk subsets, 
making comprehensive evaluation challenging 33. Our repository provides the foundation 
for developing objective standards necessary for comprehensive AI audits. The Domain 
Taxonomy's seven domains can structure audit protocols, while the repository's specific 
risk examples can inform testing scenarios. Organizations can demonstrate due diligence 
by documenting how they address each relevant subdomain. 
● For Researchers: the taxonomies enable systematic synthesis across disparate studies 
and identification of knowledge gaps. The database can guide research prioritization—for 
instance, our finding that pre-deployment human-caused risks receive minimal attention 
despite emerging concerns about dangerous AI development. It may provide a framework 
for prioritising among the full range of AI risks, and help researchers identify the controls 
necessary to cover that range. 
Limitations and Future Directions 
Several limitations warrant consideration. While we attempted to extract risks verbatim and 
conducted extensive calibration, conducting extraction and coding in duplicate would reduce the 
risk of bias or error. Our search, while comprehensive, focused on cross-cutting frameworks and 
excluded domain-specific taxonomies. Users focused on a particularly narrow domain (e.g., 
medical diagnostics) might benefit from using those focused taxonomies. We have not conducted 
a formal validation study to assess whether independent users can reliably categorise novel risks 
using our taxonomies. Future work should assess inter-rater reliability with coders external to the 
authorship team. Such validation would increase confidence in the taxonomies' utility for 
standardising risk discourse across organisations. Our Causal Taxonomy assigns risks to human 
or AI sources, which simplifies the sociotechnical reality that many risks emerge from human-AI 
interactions rather than from either agent in isolation 24. Similarly, our Timing categories (pre-
deployment, post-deployment, other) simplify a more complex reality. Modern AI development 
often involves continuous iteration: models are deployed, monitored, retrained, and updated in 
ongoing cycles rather than progressing through discrete phases.The repository's structure also 
trades some precision for comprehensiveness; while we aimed to capture all risks, we could not 
capture risk likelihood, severity, or interactions between risks. 
The field would benefit from assessing the severity and likelihood of these risks, as has been done 
for catastrophic AI risks 34. Doing so would help in prioritising among these risks, prioritising 
among proposed controls, and addressing underexplored areas. Future research will need to help 
actors understand which of these risks are most important for them to focus on. Once prioritized, 
it is still unclear how companies and governments should best mitigate those risks without stifling 
innovation. Future studies should aim to identify the best mitigations for the most important risks. 
Finally, any new frameworks should consider including a broader range of risks identified here. For 
example, most frameworks focus on language models rather than emerging concerns like agentic 
AI and multi-agent systems 14,20. The limited attention to AI welfare and rights (appearing in only 

 
 
14 
two documents) deserves attention until we can confidently rule out AI sentience for increasingly 
advanced systems 35. 
Conclusions 
Our AI Risk Repository provides critical infrastructure for effective technology governance in an era 
of rapid AI advancement. The development of appropriate governance frameworks requires a 
shared understanding of what risks need to be governed—our repository provides this foundation. 
The repository enables adaptive governance approaches essential for managing rapidly evolving 
technologies. Rather than static regulatory frameworks, our living database supports dynamic 
policy-making that can respond to emerging risks while avoiding premature or overly broad 
restrictions. 
The taxonomies bridge multiple research domains essential for understanding AI's societal 
impact. From a forecasting perspective, our systematic categorization of 1,725 risks provides the 
empirical foundation for projecting AI's future trajectories. From a management perspective, our 
taxonomies offer practical tools for organizational decision-making about AI development and 
deployment. From an impact assessment perspective, our comprehensive risk mapping enables 
evaluation of AI's multifaceted effects across social, economic, and environmental dimensions. 
From a governance perspective, our repository provides the shared terminology and categorization 
schemes necessary for effective policy development. This integration across domains is essential 
because AI risks themselves transcend traditional boundaries—a single AI system may 
simultaneously raise concerns about discrimination (social impact), competitive dynamics 
(economic impact), and existential risks. 
The AI Risk Repository establishes a foundation for more coordinated approaches to 
understanding and managing AI risks. By making the database living and extensible, we enable 
continuous refinement as new risks emerge and understanding evolves. It provides a common 
reference point that can reduce conceptual confusion, guide research and policy priorities, and 
support the development of comprehensive governance frameworks. As AI capabilities advance 
rapidly, such shared understanding becomes essential for managing the risks so we can safely 
realize the benefits.

 
 
15 
Methods 
A summary of our methodology is available in Figure 2. We used a systematic search strategy, 
forwards and backwards searching, and expert consultation to identify AI risk classifications, 
frameworks, and taxonomies. Since conducting the original systematic literature search, we have 
periodically identified additional relevant research through an ongoing expert consultation. We 
extracted the individual risks from these documents into a living AI Risk Database. We conducted 
two best-fit framework syntheses to create a Causal Taxonomy of AI Risks (see Table 1) and 
Domain Taxonomy of AI Risks (see Table 2), by adapting existing frameworks 26,29. We did this by 
testing their effectiveness at coding our risk data and modifying them until we created a final 
version that could effectively code all relevant risks. 
Figure 2. Overview of Study Methodology 
Schematic overview of the study methodology showing the progression from systematic literature 
search to taxonomy development. The systematic literature search comprised three components: 
peer-reviewed and grey literature search, forwards/backwards search and initial expert 
consultation, and ongoing expert consultation. These searches identified existing AI risk 
frameworks, which were extracted into a living AI risk database. Best-fit framework synthesis was 
then applied to develop two complementary outputs: the Causal Taxonomy (classifying risks by 
entity, intent, and timing) and the Domain Taxonomy (classifying risks by type of harm across 
seven domains). 
 
Systematic literature search 
We conducted this study as a systematic review 36,37. The protocol was registered in advance using 
the Open Science Framework in April 2024 (https://osf.io/egzc8). We included reviews, articles, 
reports, and documents primarily focused on proposing new frameworks, taxonomies, or other 
structured classifications of risks from AI present across multiple locations and industry sectors. 
We followed the Society for Risk Analysis 38 in defining “AI risk” as “the possibility of an 
unfortunate occurrence associated with the development or deployment of artificial intelligence,” 
while recognizing that this term can be defined in many ways 39,40.  
Systematic literature 
search
Living AI risk 
database
Best ﬁt framework 
synthesis
Causal Taxonomy
Domain Taxonomy
Existing AI risk 
frameworks
Peer-reviewed & gray 
literature search
Forwards/backwards 
search & initial 
expert consultation
Ongoing expert 
consultation

 
 
16 
We excluded book chapters, theses, commentaries, editorials, and protocols. Our pilot searches 
suggested that including these documents would significantly increase the number of search 
results to screen but not the number of relevant results. We excluded documents which discussed 
impacts, outcomes, or other consequences of AI without specifying specific risks because we 
were interested in risk classification. 
Due to our interest in broad, structured classifications of risks from AI, we excluded documents 
which focused only on risks from AI that are present in a single location or sector or that discussed 
risks specific to particular risk categories (e.g., content solely focused on different types of unfair 
decision-making) or very specific AI tools (e.g., content solely focused on risks from DALL-E). We 
excluded content which merely cited or discussed existing theories, frameworks, models, 
taxonomies, and other structured classifications rather than proposing and explaining them. This 
was because we wanted to understand and extract specific risks using their original source 
material. We excluded anything which discussed sources of risk at a high level of abstraction (e.g., 
the sources of sociotechnical risk in AIs) or risk-assessment processes (e.g, how organizations 
can assess risks from AI) rather than focusing on classifying AI risks more specifically. Non-
English articles, reports, and documents were excluded due to resource constraints related to their 
retrieval and translation. 
Two of the above exclusion criteria were added after protocol registration in order to retain only 
the most relevant documents: (1) Focus only on one category of risk from AI; (2) Focus on sources 
of risk or the risk-assessment process. 
Search strategy 
Our search strategy comprised two stages. In Stage 1 we conducted a systematic search of peer-
reviewed and gray literature (i.e., non peer-reviewed materials) to identify relevant articles. We 
begin by explaining our search-term generation and strategy, followed by our database searches in 
Scopus and various preprint databases. We then describe our screening process, which uses 
active learning with ASReview. This process includes four phases: initial random screening for 
training data, application of active learning with specific stopping rules, model switching for 
comprehensive coverage, and quality evaluation. Finally, we outline our full-text screening and 
calibration procedures. In Stage 2 we conducted forwards (citation) and backwards (references) 
searching and expert consultation to identify additional eligible articles (both processes described 
below). 
Stage 1: Searching & screening peer reviewed and gray literature 
Searching 
Search terms were generated through an iterative process and chosen for their empirical balance 
between sensitivity and specificity 41. This included terms related to artificial intelligence (Artificial 
intelligence, AI, Artificial general intelligence, AGI), frameworks, taxonomies, and other structured 
classifications (Framework, Review, Overview, Taxonomy*), and risks (Risk, Harm, Hazard). This 
led to the following search string:  
TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ( "artificial intelligence" OR ai OR "artificial general intelligence" OR agi ) 
AND ( framework OR taxonom* OR review ) AND ( risk OR harm OR hazard ) ) AND ( LIMIT-
TO ( LANGUAGE, "English" ) ).  

 
 
17 
We conducted a Scopus search to identify relevant academic research. The same search string 
was used on the following preprint databases to identify relevant literature: arXiv, Social Science 
Research Network (SSRN), Research Square, medRxiv, TechRxiv, bioRxiv, and ChemRxiv. Both 
searches were conducted on 4 April 2024. Relevant articles were downloaded for screening. 
Title/abstract and full-text screening  
Two authors formed a team to conduct title/abstract and full-text screening. Before screening, the 
team calibrated their decision-making by independently screening the same randomly selected 
articles (n = 23), comparing the results, and resolving disagreements. Agreement was achieved on 
21 of 23 records (91%). To expedite title and abstract screening, we used active learning in 
ASReview 42, with the process done independently and in duplicate by two reviewers. 
Active learning is an emerging research technique which uses machine learning to reduce the total 
number of records requiring manual screening. It is now widely used for efficiently screening large 
datasets in systematic reviews and meta-analyses 43,44, and has been validated in a number of 
diverse fields 42,44 and datasets 45.  
Throughout the active-learning process, we followed the four step SAFE procedure outlined by 
Boetje and van de Schoot 46 to ensure that screening identified relevant articles both rigorously and 
efficiently: 
Phase 1: Screen a random set of articles to create training data for active-learning model 
As per SAFE, the screening team each randomly screened and labeled 1% of the total search yield 
(264 records in total). Each member of the team then created separate projects in ASReview and 
uploaded their own files, which included all retrieved studies and the random screening data. The 
random screening data was automatically marked as prior knowledge, and the active-learning 
phase commenced.  
Phase 2: Apply active learning during screening until stopping rule is reached 
For the first iteration of the active-learning model, the team followed Boetje and van de Schoot’s 46 
recommendation to use the Oracle model and the default model setup (TF-IDF as the feature 
extractor, Naive Bayes as the classifier, maximum as the query strategy and dynamic resampling 
(double) as the balance strategy). We aimed to follow Boetje and van de Schoot’s 46 four-fold 
stopping heuristics, screening until four mutually independent conditions are met: 
1. All key papers are marked as relevant. 
2. At least twice the estimated number of relevant records in the total dataset are screened. 
3. More than 10% of the total dataset has been screened. 
4. No relevant records are identified in the last 50 records screened. 
These four stopping heuristics aim to achieve a sensitivity of 95% 44, ensuring comprehensive data 
assessment while preventing excessive time spent on unlikely candidates.  
The team met three of these conditions: they i) screened more than twice the estimated number of 
relevant records, ii) screened more than 10% of the total dataset, and iii) had not identified any 
relevant records in the last 50 records. However, one condition (‘All key papers are marked as 
relevant’) could not be met due to a bug with the model. Only three out of the four key papers 
20,26,47,48 had appeared in the screening process, and the final key paper was scheduled to appear 

 
 
18 
several thousand papers later. Because Stage 3 of the SAFE process aims to ensure that records 
are not missed due to the initial model, the screening team switched models to see if a new model 
would locate the relevant paper.  
Phase 3: Switch active-learning model and screen additional records until stopping rule is reached 
Based on a review of relevant literature 42,e.g., 44, we use the Oracle model with the following set-up: 
a fully connected neural network (2 hidden layers) model as the classifier and sBert as the feature 
extractor, maximum as the query strategy and dynamic resampling (double) as the balance 
strategy. The model was trained on the data that was labeled while using the previous model. 
Screening stopped when no extra relevant records were identified in the last 50 records. Both 
authors screened in the missing key paper within the first two records found by the new model.  
Phase 4: Evaluate quality  
For quality checks, the screening team screened records previously labeled as irrelevant using the 
Oracle model and the default model set-up (i.e., the same model that was used in the initial/main 
model phase). This model was trained using the 10 highest- and lowest-ranked records from the 
model switching phase. Both team members screened records to identify any relevant records that 
might have been falsely excluded. This continued until the stopping rule was met (no extra relevant 
records identified in the last 50 records).  
One member of the screening team screened the full text of all records that were included at the 
title/abstracts step. For calibration, 10% of the records were screened in duplicate, with 100% 
interrater reliability achieved. Conflicts were resolved by discussion for any remaining records.  
Stage 2: Forwards and backwards searching and expert consultation 
Following full-text screening, we undertook forwards and backwards searching using Scopus, 
Google Scholar, and various preprint servers hosting the included gray literature. Backwards 
searching involved identifying and reviewing all references from articles included in Stage 1, while 
forwards searching involved identifying and reviewing all articles that cited an included article. We 
also undertook an expert consultation, which involved sharing the preliminary set of included 
articles with their authors and other experts and requesting recommendations for relevant 
frameworks that had been overlooked. All records identified during forwards and backwards 
searching and expert consultation were screened by one author. Those which met inclusion 
criteria were added to the backlog for extraction. 
Extraction into living AI Risk Database 
Five authors were involved in data extraction. A template data extraction spreadsheet was 
developed to capture various details from the studies, including title, abstract, author, year, 
source/outlet, risk category name, risk category description, risk subcategory name, risk 
subcategory description, and page number. This spreadsheet was refined over several rounds of 
pilot testing and extractor calibration on subsets of randomly selected articles. Data extraction 
was then conducted individually, with regular meetings for discussion and conflict resolution. 
Based on the recommendations of grounded theory, we aimed to capture the studied phenomena 
directly from the data rather than impose our interpretations 49,cf. 50. Consequently, we extracted 

 
 
19 
risks based on how the authors presented them, maintaining fidelity to their original 
categorizations and descriptions. 
Best fit framework synthesis approach 
Seven authors were involved in data synthesis. We used a “best fit” framework synthesis approach 
to develop two AI risk taxonomies. Best-fit framework synthesis is a method for rapidly, clearly, 
and practically understanding the relationships and structures between concepts in a topic area 
22,23. It combines the strengths of framework synthesis 51, which is a “top down” positivist method 
where concepts are coded against a pre-existing structure, and thematic synthesis 52, which is a 
“bottom up” interpretative method where concepts are iteratively analyzed to identify patterns and 
structure. We describe the process in Figure 3. 
Figure 3. Methodology for Best Fit Framework Synthesis 
Flowchart illustrating the iterative best-fit framework synthesis process used to develop the Causal 
and Domain Taxonomies. The process began with included AI risk classifications, frameworks, 
and taxonomies. Two parallel initial steps involved defining the purpose of each taxonomy and 
extracting risks into the living AI risks database. An existing taxonomy was selected as the starting 
framework (v1). Risks from the database were coded using this existing taxonomy. Categories and 
descriptions were then updated to accommodate risks that could not be coded against v1, 
producing an updated taxonomy (v2). This coding and updating cycle was repeated iteratively (v3, 
etc.) until all relevant risks could be coded using the final taxonomy. See Supplementary 
Information for detailed documentation of taxonomy iterations. 
 
To conduct a best-fit framework synthesis, we identified published frameworks in an area (through 
our systematic search and screening), selected the “best” existing framework for our purpose, then 
used that existing framework to code the concepts (i.e., all the risks extracted into the living AI Risk 
Update taxonomy categories and descriptions to 
accommodate risks that cannot be coded against v1
Included AI risk classiﬁcations, frameworks,and 
taxonomies
Select ‘best’ existing 
taxonomy (v1)
Extract risks into living AI 
risks database
Code risks from database using existing (v1) taxonomy
Code risks from database using updated taxonomy (v2)
Iterate until all risks from database can be coded using 
the taxonomy (v3…)
Deﬁne purpose of 
taxonomy 

 
 
20 
Database). Some risks could not be coded against the existing framework. We then conducted a 
secondary thematic analysis to identify new themes in those risks and determined what changes 
needed to be made to the framework to accommodate those themes. This involved updating the 
existing categories, creating new categories, or changing the structure of the framework. This 
process was repeated until achieving a final version of the framework that could most effectively 
code all relevant risks. 
By starting with an existing framework, the synthesis can achieve a coherent framework more 
quickly than inductively or thematically analyzing all the individual concepts (risks) across all 
included papers. The trade-off is that the existing framework creates a particular “lens” for 
understanding and categorizing the individual concepts, which may lead to a disconnect between 
the synthesized findings and the theoretical or epistemological perspectives in the original and 
highly varied papers. In order to mitigate this, we attempted to code the risks based on the exact 
wording the authors had presented rather than our interpretation of what they may have intended 
to communicate 49,cf. 50.  
Why we developed two taxonomies of AI risk 
The goal of our best-fit framework synthesis was to create a common frame of reference for 
understanding and addressing the risks from artificial intelligence. We found that authors implicitly 
or explicitly used different lenses 53,54,e.g., 55 to create their frameworks. These lenses reveal and 
obscure different aspects of the AI risk landscape. 
Through our systematic search, we identified two types of frameworks, which we will refer to here 
as causal and domain frameworks. “Causal frameworks” focused on antecedents, capturing broad 
factors that specify how, when, or why an AI risk might emerge e.g., 48,56 rather than discuss 
categories of specific hazards and harms. In contrast, “domain frameworks” focused on 
outcomes: specific hazards and harms 57,e.g., 58 but didn’t explore their causes. 
The differences here made it challenging to create a single framework. Often, specific domain 
risks did not fit into the categories within a causal framework, and the broad categories in those 
frameworks were insufficiently specified to be useful, in isolation, for creating shared 
understanding. Similarly, broad causal categorizations of how, when, or why an AI risk emerges did 
not fit with domain frameworks outlining narrow and specific sets of risk. 
We therefore resolved that the ideal common frame of reference required two intersecting 
taxonomies: one to precisely decompose or define an AI risk based on the antecedent conditions 
under which it occurred (a “causal taxonomy”), and one that classified commonly discussed 
hazards and harms associated with AI into understandable and distinct domains (a “domain 
taxonomy”).  
In the following sections, we describe the process of developing these two taxonomies using a 
best-fit framework synthesis approach. 

 
 
21 
Development of Causal Taxonomy of AI Risks 
Best-fit taxonomy: Yampolskiy (2016) 
We chose Yampolskiy’s (2016) Taxonomy of pathways to dangerous AI as our initial best-fit 
framework for developing a causal taxonomy for AI risk. We selected Yampolskiy’s taxonomy as it 
was highly cited (116 citations, fifth most highly cited from the set of identified papers), simple, 
comprehensive, and provided sufficient definitions for each category. 
Yampolskiy’s taxonomy systematically classifies the ways in which an AI system might become 
dangerous based on two main factors: 
1. Timing - whether the AI became dangerous at the pre-deployment or post-deployment 
stage, and 
2. Cause - whether the danger arose from External Causes (On Purpose, By Mistake, 
Environment) or Internal Causes originating from the AI system itself (Independently).  
Yampolskiy proposes that this taxonomy covers scenarios ranging from AI being purposely 
designed to be dangerous, to becoming dangerous by accident during development or after 
deployment, to turning dangerous due to environmental factors outside its control, or evolving to 
become dangerous through recursive self-improvement. Each “pathway” represents a set of causal 
conditions that lead to AI causing harm; for example, a person using a large language model (LLM) 
to generate fake news for political gain would be classified under Path B (“Timing: post-
deployment; External cause: on purpose”). 
Coding and iteration process 
We started by using Yampolskiy's taxonomy to categorize a sample of risks from our database. We 
then identified themes in the AI Risk Database that didn't fit into Yampolskiy's taxonomy. We 
updated the taxonomy categories, criteria, and descriptions, then coded a further sample of risks. 
This process was repeated over three iterations until the taxonomy categories, criteria, and 
descriptions were stable. We describe this iteration process in detail in Supplemental Notes S3. 
Final taxonomy 
The final version of the taxonomy, which we named the Causal Taxonomy of AI Risks, included 
three categories of causal factors that specify how, why, or when an AI risk might emerge. The first 
category, Entity, classified the entity (e.g., AI system, Human) that was presented as causing the 
risk to occur due to a decision or action taken by that entity. The second category, Intent, classified 
whether the risk was presented as an expected outcome or unexpected outcome of an entity 
pursuing a goal. The third category, Timing, classified the stage in the AI lifecycle that the risk is 
presented as occurring (e.g., pre-deployment, post-deployment). Each of these categories includes 
a third option, "Other," which captures risks that are not clearly categorizable within the primary 
options. Each of the categories is therefore mutually exclusive; each risk is classified under only 
one option within each category. The Causal Taxonomy is presented and described in more detail 
in the Results section. 

 
 
22 
Development of Domain Taxonomy of AI Risks 
Best-fit taxonomy: Weidinger (2022) 
We chose Weidinger et al (2022) “Taxonomy of Risks posed by Language Models” as our initial 
best-fit framework of consequences because it and its related papers 57,59 are among the highest 
cited in our review. Although this taxonomy was focused on language models, its set of categories 
was one of the most comprehensive, and it has been iterated upon over several publications. It 
included six areas of risks from language models: 
1. Discrimination, Hate speech and Exclusion; 
2. Information Hazards; 
3. Misinformation Harms; 
4. Malicious Uses; 
5. Human-computer interaction Harms; and 
6. Environmental and Socioeconomic Harms. 
Each area of risk described several subcategories of risk. 
Coding and iteration process 
We applied this taxonomy by coding as many of the included risks as possible using the Weidinger 
(2022) taxonomy. We operationalized the taxonomy by using the definitions or descriptions for 
each category from Weidinger (2022). Because several similar taxonomies were included in the set 
identified by the systematic literature review 26,57,59, we considered descriptions and definitions 
from any of these taxonomies in our initial coding. 
We iterated on the taxonomy to accommodate risks that could not be coded against the existing 
Weidinger (2022) taxonomy. The most common risks that could not be accommodated were those 
related to AI system safety, failures and limitations; AI system security vulnerabilities and attacks; 
and competitive dynamics or other failures of governance to manage the development and 
deployment of AI systems. We describe this iteration process in detail in Supplemental Notes S4. 
Final taxonomy: Domain Taxonomy of AI Risks 
The final version of the taxonomy, which we named the Domain Taxonomy of AI Risks, included 
seven domains of AI risk, and 24 subdomains of hazards and harms associated with AI. The 
domains were: 
1. Discrimination & toxicity, 
2. Privacy & security, 
3. Misinformation, 
4. Malicious actors & misuse, 
5. Human-computer interaction, 
6. Socioeconomic & environmental harms, and 
7. AI system safety, failures & limitations. 

 
 
23 
As with Weidinger’s (2022) taxonomy, these risk domains are not mutually exclusive; many risks 
span multiple domains or subdomains due to their interconnected nature. For example, a risk 
related to AI-generated disinformation could be relevant to both the Misinformation domain and the 
Malicious actors & misuse domain. The Domain Taxonomy is presented and detailed in the Results 
section.  
Coding 
Three authors were involved in coding risks against our taxonomies. Risks were coded by a single 
reviewer and discussed with the team where relevant. The coding process involved systematically 
categorizing each extracted risk according to the definitions within the relevant taxonomy. Based 
on grounded theory recommendations (cf. Charmaz, 2006; Corbin & Strauss, 2014), we coded risks 
as they were presented by the authors, aiming to capture the studied phenomena directly rather 
than impose our own interpretations or infer intent. When coding risks for our Causal Taxonomy, 
we categorized risks relevant to multiple levels of each causal factor (e.g., both pre-deployment 
and post-deployment) as "Other." In our Domain Taxonomy, we categorized risks relevant to 
multiple domains and subdomains (e.g., AI-generated disinformation) in the single most relevant 
category. 
Ongoing expert consultation and updates 
We maintain the AI Risk Repository as a living resource through several mechanisms. First, we 
conduct biannual review cycles in which we screen documents proposed through our public 
submission form, author outreach, and expert consultations. That is, we solicit new or missed 
frameworks from the authors of existing frameworks, from interactions with other experts, and 
from a public form on our website. After screening proposed documents against our criteria, we 
extract and code risks using the procedures described above. We version the repository with each 
update logged and dated on the website. For example, between May 2024 and March 2025, we 
received 44 document recommendations and included 22 that met eligibility criteria, 
demonstrating active maintenance. Between March 2025 and December 2025, we received 78 
document recommendations and included 9 that met criteria. 
We acknowledge that long-term sustainability depends on continued institutional support. The 
repository is currently maintained by researchers at MIT FutureTech and the University of 
Queensland. We have designed the repository infrastructure to minimise maintenance burden: the 
public submission form, standardised extraction templates, and documented coding procedures 
allow updates to proceed efficiently. Should our capacity for active maintenance change, we 
commit to clearly indicating on the website whether the repository remains actively updated or has 
become a static archive. 

 
 
24 
Resource Availability 
Lead Contact 
Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by 
corresponding author, Michael Noetel (m.noetel@uq.edu.au). 
Materials Availability 
This study did not generate new unique reagents or materials. 
Data and Code Availability 
All data is publicly available at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/CET8G.25 
Acknowledgments 
This work was funded by Coefficient Giving (formerly known as Open Philanthropy), who had no 
role in the design, collection, analysis, interpretation or reporting of the data. 
Declaration of Interests 
James Dao and Soroush Pour are employees of Harmony Intelligence, a company that conducts 
evaluations of AI risks. Their potential conflict of interest did not influence study design, risk 
classifications, or conclusions. 
Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies 
in the writing process 
Generative AI (Anthropic's Claude) was used to provide feedback on the writing in this manuscript. 
After using this tool, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full 
responsibility for the content of the published article. 
 

 
 
25 
Author Contributions 
Conceptualization: PS, AS, EG, MN, NT; Methodology: PS, AS, EG, JG, MN; Investigation and Data 
Collection: PS, AS, EG, JG; Analysis: PS, AS, EG, JG; Writing - original draft preparation: PS, AS, MN; 
Writing - review and editing: All authors; Project administration: AS, MN, NT; Supervision: MN, NT, 
RU, JD, SP, SC 
 
References 
1. 
Kovari, A. (2025). Ethical use of ChatGPT in education—Best practices to combat AI-induced 
plagiarism. Front. Educ. 9, 1465703. https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2024.1465703. 
2. 
Hendrycks, D., Mazeika, M., and Woodside, T. (2023). An overview of catastrophic AI risks. 
Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.12001. 
3. 
Center for AI Safety (2023). Statement on AI Risk. Center for AI Safety. 
https://www.safe.ai/work/statement-on-ai-risk. 
4. 
UK Department for Science, Innovation and Technology (2023). A pro-innovation approach to 
AI regulation. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ai-regulation-a-pro-innovation-
approach/white-paper. 
5. 
UK Department for Science, Innovation and Technology (2023). The Bletchley Declaration by 
Countries Attending the AI Safety Summit, 1-2 November 2023. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ai-safety-summit-2023-the-bletchley-
declaration. 
6. 
Bengio, Y., Mindermann, S., Privitera, D., Besiroglu, T., Bommasani, R., Casper, S., Choi, Y., Fox, 
P., Garfinkel, B., Goldfarb, D., et al. (2025). International AI Safety Report. 
https://internationalaisafetyreport.org/publication/international-ai-safety-report-2025. 
7. 
Anderson-Samways, B., Ee, S., O’Brien, J., Buhl, M., and Williams, Z. (2024). Responsible 
Scaling: Comparing Government Guidance and Company Policy (Institute for AI Policy and 
Strategy). 
8. 
Anthropic (2023). Anthropic’s responsible scaling policy. https://www-
cdn.anthropic.com/1adf000c8f675958c2ee23805d91aaade1cd4613/responsible-scaling-
policy.pdf.  
9. 
Google DeepMind (2024). Frontier Safety Framework (Google DeepMind). 
https://deepmind.google/blog/introducing-the-frontier-safety-framework/.  
10. OpenAI (2025). Preparedness Framework (OpenAI). https://openai.com/index/updating-our-
preparedness-framework/. 
11. Nevo, S., Lahav, D., Karpur, A., Bar-On, Y., Bradley, H.A., and Alstott, J. (2024). Securing AI 
Model Weights: Preventing Theft and Misuse of Frontier Models (RAND Corporation). 
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA2849-1.html. 
12. Marsh, H.W., Pekrun, R., Parker, P.D., Murayama, K., Guo, J., Dicke, T., and Arens, A.K. (2019). 

 
 
26 
The murky distinction between self-concept and self-efficacy: Beware of lurking jingle-jangle 
fallacies. J. Educ. Psychol. 111, 331–353. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000281. 
13. Tan, S., Taeihagh, A., and Baxter, K. (2022). The Risks of Machine Learning Systems. Preprint 
at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.09852. 
14. Gabriel, I., Manzini, A., Keeling, G., Hendricks, L.A., Rieser, V., Iqbal, H., Tomašev, N., Ktena, I., 
Kenton, Z., and Rodriguez, M. (2024). The Ethics of Advanced AI Assistants. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.16244. 
15. Marcolin, B.L., Compeau, D.R., Munro, M.C., and Huff, S.L. (2000). Assessing User 
Competence: Conceptualization and Measurement. Inf. Syst. Res.11, 37–60. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.11.1.37.11782. 
16. Harrison McKnight, D., and Chervany, N.L. (2001). Trust and Distrust Definitions: One Bite at a 
Time. In Trust in Cyber-societies (Springer Berlin Heidelberg), pp. 27–54. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45547-7_3. 
17. Röttinger, M. (2006). Towards a European code napoléon/ABGB/BGB? Recent EC activities for 
a European Contract Law. Eur. Law J. 12, 807–827. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-
0386.2006.00332.x. 
18. European Commission and the United States Trade and Technology Council (2022). TTC Joint 
Roadmap for Trustworthy AI and Risk Management (European Commission). 
19. Hagendorff, T. (2024). Mapping the Ethics of Generative AI: A Comprehensive Scoping Review. 
Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.08323. 
20. McLean, S., Read, G.J.M., Thompson, J., Baber, C., Stanton, N.A., and Salmon, P.M. (2023). The 
risks associated with Artificial General Intelligence: A systematic review. J. Exp. Theor. Artif. 
Intell. 35, 649–663. https://doi.org/10.1080/0952813X.2021.1964003. 
21. Nickerson, R.C., Varshney, U., and Muntermann, J. (2013). A method for taxonomy 
development and its application in information systems. Eur. J. Inf. Syst.22, 336–359. 
https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2012.26. 
22. Carroll, C., Booth, A., and Cooper, K. (2011). A worked example of “best fit” framework 
synthesis: a systematic review of views concerning the taking of some potential 
chemopreventive agents. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 11, 29. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-
2288-11-29. 
23. Carroll, C., Booth, A., Leaviss, J., and Rick, J. (2013). “Best fit” framework synthesis: refining 
the method. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 13, 37. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2288-13-37. 
24. Leveson, N.G. (2016). Engineering a safer world: Systems thinking applied to safety (MIT 
Press). 
25. Slattery, P., Saeri, A.K., Grundy, E.A.C., Graham, J., Noetel, M., Uuk, R., Pour, S., Dao, J., Casper, 
S., and Thompson, N. (2024). The AI Risk Repository. OSF. 
https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/CET8G. 
26. Weidinger, L., Uesato, J., Rauh, M., Griffin, C., Huang, P.-S., Mellor, J., Glaese, A., Cheng, M., 
Balle, B., Kasirzadeh, A., et al. (2022). Taxonomy of Risks posed by Language Models. In 
Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency 
FAccT ’22. (Association for Computing Machinery), pp. 214–229. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3533088. 

 
 
27 
27. Sharma, S. (2024). Benefits or concerns of AI: A multistakeholder responsibility. Futures 157, 
103328. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2024.103328. 
28. AI Verify Foundation (2023). Summary Report for Binary Classification Model of Credit Risk (AI 
Verify Foundation). 
29. Yampolskiy, R.V. (2016). Taxonomy of pathways to dangerous artificial intelligence. In The 
Workshops of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 
30. Hammond, L., Chan, A., Clifton, J., Hoelscher-Obermaier, J., Khan, A., McLean, E., Smith, C., 
Barfuss, W., Foerster, J., and Gavenčiak, T. (2025). Multi-Agent Risks from Advanced AI. 
Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2502.14143. 
31. Shevlane, T., Farquhar, S., Garfinkel, B., Phuong, M., Whittlestone, J., Leung, J., Kokotajlo, D., 
Marchal, N., Anderljung, M., Kolt, N., et al. (2023). Model evaluation for extreme risks. Preprint 
at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.15324. 
32. European Parliament (2024). Legislative resolution of 13 March 2024 on the Proposal for a 
Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on laying down harmonised rules on 
Artificial Intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) and amending certain Union Legislative Acts. 
https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/TA-9-2024-0138_EN.pdf. 
33. Costanza-Chock, S., Raji, I.D., and Buolamwini, J. (2022). Who Audits the Auditors? 
Recommendations from a field scan of the algorithmic auditing ecosystem. In Proceedings of 
the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency FAccT ’22. 
(Association for Computing Machinery), pp. 1571–1583. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3533213. 
34. Karger, E., Rosenberg, J., Jacobs, Z., Hickman, M., Hadshar, R., Gamin, K., Smith, T., Williams, 
B., McCaslin, T., Thomas, S., et al. (2023). Forecasting Existential Risks: Evidence from a Long-
Run Forecasting Tournament (Forecasting Research Institute). 
35. Long, R., Sebo, J., Butlin, P., Finlinson, K., Fish, K., Harding, J., Pfau, J., Sims, T., Birch, J., and 
Chalmers, D. (2024). Taking AI welfare seriously. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2411.00986. 
36. Khangura, S., Konnyu, K., Cushman, R., Grimshaw, J., and Moher, D. (2012). Evidence 
summaries: the evolution of a rapid review approach. Syst. Rev. 1, 10. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/2046-4053-1-10. 
37. Tricco, A.C., Langlois, E.V., and Straus, S.E. (2017). Rapid reviews to strengthen health policy 
and systems: a practical guide (World Health Organization). 
38. Aven, T., Ben-Haim, Y., Boje Andersen, H., Cox, T., Droguett, E.L., Greenberg, M., Guikema, S., 
Kröger, W., Renn, O., and Thompson, K.M. (2018). Society for risk analysis glossary. (Society 
for Risk Analysis). https://www.sra.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/SRA-Glossary-
FINAL.pdf. 
39. Li, C., and Li, Y. (2023). Factors Influencing Public Risk Perception of Emerging Technologies: 
A Meta-Analysis. Sustain. Sci. Pract. Policy 15, 3939. https://doi.org/10.3390/su15053939. 
40. Aven, T. (2012). The risk concept—historical and recent development trends. Reliab. Eng. Syst. 
Saf. 99, 33–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2011.11.006. 
41. Wilczynski, N.L., Haynes, R.B., and Hedges Team (2003). Developing optimal search strategies 
for detecting clinically sound causation studies in MEDLINE. AMIA Annu. Symp. Proc. 2003, 

 
 
28 
719–723. 
42. van de Schoot, R., de Bruin, J., Schram, R., Zahedi, P., de Boer, J., Weijdema, F., Kramer, B., 
Huijts, M., Hoogerwerf, M., Ferdinands, G., et al. (2021). An open source machine learning 
framework for efficient and transparent systematic reviews. Nat. Mach. Intell.3, 125–133. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-020-00287-7. 
43. Gates, A., Guitard, S., Pillay, J., Elliott, S.A., Dyson, M.P., Newton, A.S., and Hartling, L. (2019). 
Performance and usability of machine learning for screening in systematic reviews: a 
comparative evaluation of three tools. Syst. Rev. 8, 278. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-019-
1222-2. 
44. Campos, D.G., Fütterer, T., Gfrörer, T., Lavelle-Hill, R., Murayama, K., König, L., Hecht, M., 
Zitzmann, S., and Scherer, R. (2024). Screening Smarter, Not Harder: A Comparative Analysis 
of Machine Learning Screening Algorithms and Heuristic Stopping Criteria for Systematic 
Reviews in Educational Research. Educ. Psychol. Rev. 36, 19. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-
024-09862-5. 
45. Ferdinands, G., Schram, R., de Bruin, J., Bagheri, A., Oberski, D.L., Tummers, L., Teijema, J.J., 
and van de Schoot, R. (2023). Performance of active learning models for screening 
prioritization in systematic reviews: a simulation study into the Average Time to Discover 
relevant records. Syst. Rev. 12, 100. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-023-02257-7. 
46. Boetje, J., and van de Schoot, R. (2024). The SAFE procedure: a practical stopping heuristic for 
active learning-based screening in systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Syst. Rev. 13, 81. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-024-02502-7. 
47. Steimers, A., and Schneider, M. (2022). Sources of Risk of AI Systems. Int. J. Environ. Res. 
Public Health 19, 3641. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19063641. 
48. Critch, A., and Russell, S. (2023). TASRA: a Taxonomy and Analysis of Societal-Scale Risks 
from AI. Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.06924. 
49. Corbin, J., and Strauss, A. (2014). Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures 
for Developing Grounded Theory (SAGE Publications). 
50. Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide through Qualitative 
Analysis (SAGE). 
51. Ritchie, J., and Spencer, L. (2002). Qualitative data analysis for applied policy research. In 
Analyzing qualitative data (Routledge), pp. 173–194. 
52. Thomas, J., and Harden, A. (2008). Methods for the thematic synthesis of qualitative research 
in systematic reviews. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 8, 45. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2288-8-
45. 
53. Nilsen, P. (2015). Making sense of implementation theories, models and frameworks. 
Implement. Sci. 10, 53. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-015-0242-0. 
54. Sovacool, B.K., and Hess, D.J. (2017). Ordering theories: Typologies and conceptual 
frameworks for sociotechnical change. Soc. Stud. Sci. 47, 703–750. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312717709363. 
55. Head, B.W. (2008). Three lenses of evidence‐based policy. Aust. J. Publ. Adm. 67, 1–11. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8500.2007.00564.x. 

 
 
29 
56. Kilian, K.A., Ventura, C.J., and Bailey, M.M. (2023). Examining the differential risk from high-
level artificial intelligence and the question of control. Futures 151, 103182. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2023.103182. 
57. Weidinger, L., Mellor, J., Rauh, M., Griffin, C., Uesato, J., Huang, P.-S., Cheng, M., Glaese, M., 
Balle, B., Kasirzadeh, A., et al. (2021). Ethical and social risks of harm from Language Models. 
Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2112.04359. 
58. Solaiman, I., Talat, Z., Agnew, W., Ahmad, L., Baker, D., Blodgett, S.L., Daumé, H., III, Dodge, J., 
Evans, E., Hooker, S., et al. (2023). Evaluating the Social Impact of Generative AI Systems in 
Systems and Society. Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.05949. 
59. Weidinger, L., Rauh, M., Marchal, N., Manzini, A., Hendricks, L.A., Mateos-Garcia, J., Bergman, 
S., Kay, J., Griffin, C., Bariach, B., et al. (2023). Sociotechnical Safety Evaluation of Generative 
AI Systems. Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.11986. 
60. Ji, J., Qiu, T., Chen, B., Zhang, B., Lou, H., Wang, K., Duan, Y., He, Z., Zhou, J., Zhang, Z., et al. 
(2023). AI Alignment: A Comprehensive Survey. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.05374. 

 
 
 
Supplementary Table S1. 20 most cited documents that 
present a taxonomy or classification of AI risks 
Supplementary Table S1 presents the included taxonomies by citation rate. The included 
documents contained a range of highly cited taxonomies.  
 
Title 
First author 
First author 
affiliation (country) Year 
Type 
Citations^ 
Citations^ / 
year 
Ethical and social risks of harm from 
language models 
Weidinger 
Deepmind (UK) 
2021 
Preprint 
1106 
277 
Generative AI and ChatGPT: Applications, 
Challenges, and AI-Human Collaboration 
Nah 
City University of 
Hong Kong (China) 
2023 
Journal 
Article 
933 
467 
Taxonomy of Risks posed by Language 
Models 
Weidinger 
Deepmind (UK) 
2022 
Conference 
Paper 
668 
223 
The ethics of ChatGPT -- Exploring the 
ethical issues of an emerging technology 
Stahl 
University of 
Nottingham (UK) 
2024 
Journal 
Article 
352 
352 
Trustworthy LLMs: a Survey and 
Guideline for Evaluating Large Language 
Models' Alignment 
Liu 
ByteDance 
Research (China) 
2024 
Preprint 
318 
318 
The Dark Sides of Artificial Intelligence: 
An Integrated AI Governance Framework 
for Public Administration 
Wirtz 
German University 
of Administrative 
Sciences Speyer 
(Germany) 
2020 
 
Journal 
Article 
310 
62 
AI Alignment: A Comprehensive Survey 
Ji 
Peking University 
(China) 
2023 
Preprint 
267 
134 
Artificial Intelligence Trust, Risk and 
Security Management (AI TRiSM): 
Frameworks, Applications, Challenges 
and Future Research Directions 
Habbal 
Karabuk University 
(Turkiye) 
2024 
Journal 
Article 
226 
226 
An Overview of Catastrophic AI Risks 
Hendrycks 
Center for AI Safety 
(USA) 
2023 
Preprint 
225 
113 
The risks associated with Artificial 
General Intelligence: A systematic review 
McLean 
University of the 
Sunshine Coast 
(Australia) 
2023 
Journal 
Article 
199 
100 
Sociotechnical Harms of Algorithmic 
Systems: Scoping a Taxonomy for Harm 
Reduction 
Shelby 
JusTech Lab, 
Google Research 
(USA) 
2023 
Conference 
Paper 
194 
97 
Model Evaluation for Extreme Risks 
Shevlane 
Google Deepmind 
(UK) 
2023 
Preprint 
173 
87 
GenAI against humanity: nefarious 
applications 
of generative artificial intelligence and 
large language models 
Ferrara 
University of 
Southern California 
(USA) 
 
 
2023 
Journal 
Article 
169 
85 
SafetyBench: Evaluating the Safety of 
Large Language Models with Multiple 
Choice Questions 
Zhang 
Tsinghua University 
(China) 
2023 
Preprint 
164 
82 

 
 
2 
Title 
First author 
First author 
affiliation (country) Year 
Type 
Citations^ 
Citations^ / 
year 
AGI Safety Literature Review 
Everitt 
Australian National 
University 
(Australia) 
2018 
Preprint 
164 
23 
Sociotechnical Safety Evaluation of 
Generative AI Systems 
Weidinger 
Google Deepmind 
(UK) 
2023 
Preprint 
139 
70 
Taxonomy of Pathways to Dangerous 
Artificial Intelligence 
Yampolskiy 
University of 
Louisville (USA) 
2016 
Journal 
Article 
138 
15 
Safety Assessment of Chinese Large 
Language Models 
Sun 
Tsinghua University 
(China) 
2023 
Preprint 
130 
65 
Evaluating the Social Impact of 
Generative AI Systems in Systems and 
Society 
Solaiman 
Hugging Face (USA) 
2023 
Preprint 
126 
63 
Governance of artificial intelligence: A 
risk and guideline-based integrative 
framework 
Wirtz 
German University 
of Administrative 
Sciences Speyer 
(Germany) 
2022 
Journal 
Article 
122 
41 
 
Note. ^ collected from Google Scholar on 21st November 2025. Seven organizational/industry reports [S1–3] were not 
indexed on Google Scholar and are therefore not listed. 
 

 
 
3 
Supplemental Note S1: Causal Taxonomy of AI Risk 
The Entity variable captures which, if any, entity is presented as the main cause of the risk. It 
includes three levels: AI, Human, and Other. When the risk is attributed to AI, it means that the risk 
arises from decisions or actions made by the AI system itself, such as generating harmful content 
or disempowering humans. Conversely, when humans are seen as the source, the risks are implied 
to be due to human actions like choosing poor training data, intentional malicious design, or 
improper use of AI systems. The "Other" category captures cases where the focal entity is not a 
human or AI or is ambiguous. For example, “The software development toolchain of LLMs is 
complex and could bring threats to the developed LLM,” implies that the toolchain could be 
exploited by humans or AI. 
The Intent variable captures whether the risk is presented as occurring as an expected or 
unexpected outcome from pursuing a goal. This variable has three levels: Intentional, 
Unintentional, and Other. Intentional risks are those that occur as expected outcomes from 
pursuing a specific goal, such as a case where AI is intentionally programmed to act deceptively or 
to exhibit bias. Unintentional risks reflect unintended consequences, such as an AI system 
inadvertently developing biases due to incomplete training data. The "Other" category captures 
risks where the intent is not clearly specified; for example, “The external tools (e.g., web APIs) 
present trustworthiness and privacy issues to LLM-based applications.” This includes cases where 
the risk may occur intentionally and unintentionally, such as "The potential for the AI system to 
infringe upon individuals' rights to privacy, through the data it collects, how it processes that data, 
or the conclusions it draws." 
The Timing variable captures the stage in the AI lifecycle at which the risk is presented as 
occurring. The levels within this variable include Pre-deployment, Post-deployment, and Other. Pre-
deployment risks are those that arise before the AI system is fully developed and put into use, such 
as vulnerabilities in the model due to coding errors. Post-deployment risks arise after the AI has 
been deployed, including issues like the misuse of AI for harmful purposes. Deployment is not 
defined in Yampolskiy (2016); we therefore interpreted it to mean when a product is being used by 
end users rather than just by developers. The "Other" category is used for risks that do not have a 
clearly defined time of occurrence (e.g., ”Resilience against adversarial attacks and distribution 
shift”). This includes cases where the presented risk may occur both before and after deployment; 
for example, "Generative models are known for their substantial energy requirements, 
necessitating significant amounts of electricity, cooling water, and hardware containing rare 
metals.”  
 

 
 
4 
Supplementary Table S2. AI Risk Database coded with 
causal taxonomy: entity, intent, timing 
Table S2 shows how the risks were coded against each category of causal factors. A majority of 
the risks were presented by authors of the documents as due to a decision or action by an artificial 
intelligence system (42%). Risks were presented equally as Unintentional (35%) compared to 
intentional (35%). Most of the risks were presented as occurring post-deployment (62%). 
Category 
Level 
Proportion 
Entity 
Human 
38% 
AI 
42% 
Other 
20% 
Intent 
Intentional 
35% 
Unintentional 
35% 
Other 
30% 
Timing 
Pre-deployment 
13% 
Post-deployment 
62% 
Other 
25% 
Note. Totals may not match due to rounding. 
 
 
 

 
 
5 
Supplementary Table S3. AI Risk Database coded with 
Causal Taxonomy: entity x intent x timing 
Table S3 shows how the risks intersect across our three causal factors. The most common triads 
of causal conditions under which an AI risk was presented as occurring were Entity = Human, 
Intention = Intentional, Timing = Post-deployment (18% of all risks). This was followed by Entity = 
AI, Intention = Unintentional, Timing = Post-deployment (14% of all risks).  
 
 
Intent 
Timing 
Entity 
Intentional 
Unintentional 
Other 
Pre-deployment 
Human 
2% 
3% 
• 
AI 
• 
2% 
• 
Other 
• 
• 
• 
Post-deployment 
Human 
18% 
4% 
3% 
AI 
5% 
14% 
9% 
Other 
2% 
2% 
4% 
Other 
Human 
3% 
2% 
2% 
AI 
3% 
4% 
3% 
Other 
• 
2% 
8% 
Note. Taxonomy categories with a prevalence ≥ 10% are highlighted. Categories with a prevalence less than 2% in the AI Risk 
Database are shown as • for ease of interpretation. 
 
 

 
 
6 
Supplementary Table S4. Included documents coded with 
causal taxonomy 
Papers varied significantly in terms of which causal factors they examined. Two documents have 
blank rows in the table because they did not present risks that could be coded against the Causal 
Taxonomy [S#26, 3,S#36, 4]. Human-related risks were identified in 65 out of 74 documents (85%), 
AI-related risks in 70 out of 74 documents (93%), and other risks in 58 out of 74 documents (77%). 
Regarding intent, intentional risks were noted in 65 out of 74 documents (85%), unintentional risks 
in 64 out of 74 documents (85%), and other intent-related risks in 67 out of 74 documents (89%). In 
terms of timing, pre-deployment risks were identified in 46 out of 74 documents (59%), post-
deployment risks in 69 out of 74 documents (92%), and other timing-related risks in 63 out of 74 
documents (84%). The majority of documents recognized risks arising from both human and AI 
actions, with near equal acknowledgment of intentional and unintentional risks. Post-deployment 
risks were more frequently discussed than pre-deployment risks, indicating the documents 
included focused more on the consequences of deployed AI systems.  
 
 
Entity 
Intent 
Timing 
ID First Author (Year) 
Human 
AI 
Other 
Intentional 
Unintentional 
Other 
Pre- 
deployment 
Post- 
deployment 
Other 
1 Critch (2023) [S5] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
2 Cui (2024) [S6] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
3 Cunha (2023) [S7] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
4 Deng (2023) [S8] 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
5 
Hagendorff (2024) 
[S9] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
6 
Hogenhout (2021) 
[S10] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
7 Kilian (2023) [S11] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
8 McLean (2023) [S12] 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
9 Meek (2016) [S13] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
10 Paes (2023) [S14] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
11 Shelby (2023) [S15] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
12 
Sherman (2023) 
[S16] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
13 
Solaiman (2023) 
[S17] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
14 
Steimers (2022) 
[S18] 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
15 Tan (2022) [S19] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
16 
Weidinger (2022) 
[S20] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
17 
Weidinger (2021) 
[S21] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
18 
Weidinger (2023) 
[S22] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
19 Wirtz (2022) [S23] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
20 Wirtz (2020) [S24] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
21 Zhang (2022) [S25] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 

 
 
7 
 
 
Entity 
Intent 
Timing 
ID First Author (Year) 
Human 
AI 
Other 
Intentional 
Unintentional 
Other 
Pre- 
deployment 
Post- 
deployment 
Other 
22 
Hendrycks (2023) 
[S26] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
23 Vidgen (2024) [S27]  
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
24 Gabriel (2024) [S28] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
25 
Shevlane (2023) 
[S29] 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
26 AIVerify (2023) [S3]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 Sun (2023) [S30] 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
28 Zhang (2023) [S31] 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
29 Habbal (2024) [S32] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
30 Liu (2024) [S33] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
31 EPIC (2023) [S1] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
32 Stahl (2024) [S34] 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
33 Nah (2023) [S35] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
34 Ji (2023) [S36] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
35 
Hendrycks (2022) 
[S37] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
36 Sharma (2024) [S4] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
Giarmoleo (2024) 
[S38] 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
38 Kumar (2023) [S39] 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
39 Saghiri (2022) [S40] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
40 
Yampolskiy (2016) 
[S41] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
41 Allianz (2018) [S2] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
42 Teixeira (2022) [S42] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
43 
InfoComm (2023) 
[S43] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
44 
Coghlan (2023) 
[S44] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
45 TC260 (2024) [S45] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
46 Ferrara (2023) [S46] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
47 G'sell (2024) [S47] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
48 NIST (2024) [S48] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
49 Bengio (2024) [S49] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
50 Zeng (2024) [S50] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
51 Everitt (2018) [S51] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
52 Maham (2023) [S52] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
53 Maas (2023) [S53] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
54 Leech (2024) [S54] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
55 Clarke (2022) [S55] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
56 GOS (2023) [S56] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
57 Ghosh (2025) [S57] 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
58 
Abercrombie (2024) 
[S58] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 

 
 
8 
 
 
Entity 
Intent 
Timing 
ID First Author (Year) 
Human 
AI 
Other 
Intentional 
Unintentional 
Other 
Pre- 
deployment 
Post- 
deployment 
Other 
59 
Schnitzer (2024) 
[S59] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
60 Bengio (2025) [S60] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
61 Uuk (2025) [S61] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
62 Gipiškis (2024) [S62] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
63 
Hammond (2025) 
[S63] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
64 Marchal (2024) [S64] 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
65 IBM (2025) [S65] 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
66 Li (2025) [S66] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
67 DSIT (2023) [S67] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
68 Chin (2025) [S68] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
69 Stanley (2024) [S69] 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
70 Perlo (2025) [S70] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
71 Tang (2025) [S71] 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
72 Tse (2025) [S72] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
73 Anwar (2024) [S73] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
74 Wang (2025) [S74] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 

 
 
9 
Supplemental Note S2: Detailed descriptions of domains of 
AI risks 
Domain 1: Discrimination and toxicity 
1.1 Unfair discrimination and misrepresentation. Humans hold inaccurate and overgeneralized 
beliefs about the characteristics, behaviors, and attributes of members of certain social groups. 
These stereotypical beliefs and the behavior that follows from them can misrepresent, exclude, 
demean, and disadvantage the individuals to whom they apply, reinforcing existing inequality. 
Human belief and behaviors shape every part of the design, development, and deployment of AI. 
Humans program AI systems, provide training data, and decide how data is processed and stored 
[S23]. As a result, AI models can encode associations that promote and amplify biased or 
discriminatory beliefs and behaviors. In decision systems, erroneous associations can 
systematically disadvantage certain groups. This may result in harmful decisions such as wrongful 
rejection of loan or mortgage applications [S15,S24], discriminatory hiring practices that exclude 
qualified candidates [S15,S24,S39], or the misidentification and unjust arrest of individuals in law 
enforcement contexts [S14,S39]. In text and image models, biased inputs can manifest in outputs 
that reinforce harmful stereotypes and prejudices that paint certain groups and individuals “... as 
lower status and less deserving of respect” [S15].  
1.2 Exposure to toxic content. Certain types of content have the potential to cause harm to the 
people who are exposed to them. These harms can vary in impact from minor (e.g., a transient 
experience of discomfort) to more severe (e.g., psychological, social, or physical consequences 
that are significant and/or enduring). Harmful speech is prevalent on the internet, particularly on 
social media platforms [S75]. Because AI models are commonly trained on vast amounts of 
internet data, they can internalize and regenerate these speech patterns in their output. In the 
context of LLMs, this output is known as “toxic content,” an umbrella term that includes harmful, 
abusive, unsafe, and offensive material that violates community standards [S15,S43]. Frequently 
observed categories include content that promotes or encourages unlawful activities, hate, 
extremism, and violence [S6,S9,S22,S27]; provides hazardous or misleading high-risk advice 
[S9,S27]; or contains unwelcome or profoundly offensive, explicit material such as profanity, 
pornography, or child sexual abuse imagery [S22,S33]. 
1.3 Unequal performance across groups. Decisions made during the development of an algorithmic 
system and the content, quality, and diversity of the training data can significantly impact which 
people and experiences the system can effectively understand, represent, and accommodate 
[S15,S17]. Biases and limitations introduced through these factors can lead to models that 
perform significantly worse for certain subpopulations compared with others, especially those 
defined by disability, gender identity, race, social status, and ethnicity [S15,S33]. For example, when 
LLMs are trained on a small number of languages, they can underperform for others [S20,S21]. The 
underperformance of algorithmic systems for certain groups may lead to a range of negative 
consequences such as the reduced ability or complete inability to use and benefit from the system 
[S15]; increased effort or challenges in using it effectively [S15]; feelings of alienation, frustration, 
and exclusion due to the lack of inclusive design [S15]; and ultimately, unequal outcomes across 
various domains [S15,S17].  

 
 
10 
Domain 2: Privacy & security 
2.1 Compromise of privacy by obtaining, leaking, or correctly inferring sensitive information. In the 
context of generative AI, privacy violations arise when systems collect and divulge sensitive 
information that individuals or corporations do not consent to sharing with others 
[S6,S9,S16,S18,S22,S27]. Privacy violations can occur both accidentally and intentionally.  
Examples of accidental causes include AI models that memorize and inadvertently reproduce or 
leak sensitive personal information present in their training data, such as names, addresses, and 
medical records [S6,S8,S9,S15,S21]. Even when personal data is not included in the training 
dataset or directly offered by the user, models can make inferences about sensitive or protected 
traits of individuals based on predictive correlations within their history of interactions [S7,S21], 
build profiles of users [S10,S15], or train AI systems [S32]. As a result, models may save and 
reproduce sensitive information derived from prior interactions, such as classified intellectual 
property [S7,S21]. A notable example is the case where Samsung employees accidentally leaked 
confidential intellectual property to OpenAI after using ChatGPT to help with coding tasks [S7,S21].  
Intentional causes include the malicious design and use of AI to exploit users’ trust by influencing 
them to share personal or private information about themselves or others [S28]. Privacy attacks, 
such as membership inference, could allow adversaries to gain knowledge of the private records 
used to train an AI model [S28]. Malicious actors could also deliberately extract private information 
from a model by crafting prompts designed to exploit the model’s knowledge of sensitive data 
[S6].  
2.2 AI system security vulnerabilities and attacks. AI systems, like other software systems, face a 
range of security threats. These issues may arise from inherent weaknesses in the design of AI 
algorithms, the data used to train the models, or the operational context. Specific examples 
include:  
● Toolchain and dependency vulnerabilities that arise unintentionally through the use of 
automated code-generation tools (e.g., Github Copilot, Python language, OpenCV), deep 
learning frameworks (e.g., Tensorflow, PyTorch), or as a result of complex 
interdependencies in the development environment [S6].  
● External tool and API integration into AI system applications can compromise the 
trustworthiness and privacy of systems due to their potential unreliability or susceptibility 
to adversarial control [S6].  
● Security vulnerabilities in physical and network infrastructure, such as vulnerabilities in 
graphics processing units, or GPUs, or to sophisticated attacks like side-channel and 
rowhammer attacks, can lead to unauthorized access or manipulation of model parameters 
when used during training of AI systems [S6]. The use of distributed network systems for 
training AI systems such as LLMs exposes them to network-specific threats like pulsating 
attacks or congestion.  
● Direct manipulation of AI systems such as adversarial attacks and instruction-based 
attacks. Adversarial attacks focus on altering the model’s learning process or extracting its 
data. They include perturbations designed to deceive models into incorrect outputs, 
extraction attacks to steal model insights, and poisoning attacks to alter model behavior 
[S6,S28,S33]. Instruction-based attacks manipulate the way the model handles and 
responds to inputs [S9,S30,S33]. Attackers deliberately craft prompts to induce models to 

 
 
11 
produce biased or unsafe outputs (a.k.a. ‘jailbreaking’). This manipulation directly targets 
the operational aspects of AI systems with the intent to cause harm. 
Domain 3: Misinformation  
3.1 False or misleading information. LLMs can sometimes generate content that is factually 
incorrect, misleading, poorly researched, or unintelligible [S1,S7–9,S15,S35]. Risks in this category 
occur accidentally and not as a result of humans intentionally trying to cause harm, as is the case 
with disinformation [S20,S33]. Common sources of AI misinformation include noisy training data 
[S6,S33], sampling strategies that introduce randomness [S6], outdated knowledge bases [S33], 
and fine-tuning processes that encourage sycophantic behavior [S6]. Incorrect and misleading 
information generated by LLMs can result in a range of actual and anticipated negative outcomes. 
Individuals exposed to false information may form inaccurate beliefs and perceptions. This 
undermines their autonomy and ability to make free and informed choices [S20,S21]. Where 
inaccuracies in LLM predictions influence an individual’s decisions and actions, the individual may 
experience indirect physical, emotional, or material harms [S20,S28] especially but not exclusively 
in high-stakes domains such as mental health [S30,S31], physical health [S30,S31,S35], law [S20], 
and finance [S27]. For example, an LLM that offers misleading information about medical drug use 
may cause a consumer to harm themselves or others [S30]. 
3.2 Pollution of information ecosystems and loss of consensus reality. This subcategory covers the 
diverse effects of AI-driven personalisation and content-generation technologies on the 
information landscape. As AI systems become more adept at tailoring content to individual 
preferences, they risk creating “filter bubbles” [S10]. These are informational cocoons where 
individuals are predominantly exposed to news and opinions that align with their pre-existing 
beliefs. AI-driven filter bubbles are likely to be more pervasive and intense than those driven by 
traditional internet browsing and recommendation algorithms: They adapt to individual 
preferences in a more sophisticated manner (e.g., through reinforcement learning and analysis of 
user behavioral data) [S28], integrate seamlessly into daily life, and are more opaque. An 
overreliance on hyper-personalized AI information sources could lead to a “splintering” of shared 
reality, where different groups of people have vastly different understandings of what is true or 
important [S10,S28]. This is likely to be exacerbated by the proliferation of AI-enabled content 
generation technologies that spread misinformation at higher rates (e.g., clickbait), potentially 
making consumers generally distrustful of information and important institutions [S1,S28,S37]. A 
shared sense of reality is fundamental to social solidarity. Where societal bonds are weakened, 
individuals may become more hostile towards opposing views. This can hinder constructive 
dialogue on critical collective issues like climate change and public health [S28].  
Domain 4: Malicious actors and misuse 
4.1 Disinformation, surveillance, and influence at scale. Advances in AI have made powerful dual-
use technologies like voice cloning, deep fakes, content generation, and data-gathering tools 
cheaper, more efficient, and easier to use [S7]. With modest hardware requirements, these 
technologies are now within the reach of a broader group of users, including those with malicious 
intent. Disinformation is already a serious issue [S26] and involves the deliberate propagation of 
false or misleading information, usually with the intent to cause harm, influence behavior, or 
achieve a financial or political advantage [S1,S43].  

 
 
12 
AI tools could be used to amplify the impact and scope of disinformation through more 
personalized, convincing, and far-reaching messaging [S20,S21,S24,S26,S28]. For example, the use 
of advanced AI in phishing schemes enables cybercriminals to automate the creation of highly 
sophisticated image, video, and audio communications [S7,S28,S32]. These communications can 
be tailored to individual recipients (sometimes including the cloned voice of a loved one), making 
them more likely to be successful and harder for both users and anti-phishing tools to detect [S28]. 
In the realm of surveillance, AI could support and enhance the mass gathering of personal data 
[S20,S21,S28]. Historically, mass surveillance required extensive manual effort. Machine learning 
tools can now link and process large datasets much more efficiently and cheaply than human 
analysts and can make predictions and decisions without human intervention [S20]. Through 
microtargeting, actors could manipulate individual behavior more subtly and effectively using AI-
derived insights from their personal data and online behavior.  
In the hands of nefarious state actors, such capabilities could be used to enhance the 
effectiveness of illegitimate domestic surveillance campaigns and to facilitate oppression and 
control [S28]. All of the capabilities mentioned above could converge to facilitate the large-scale 
manipulation and control of what people see, hear, and believe. A form of this is automated 
censorship in which AI systems are used to selectively suppress or block specific types of 
information, content, or voices deemed undesirable to those controlling the AI [S23]. AI can not 
only be used to silence voices but also to entrench specific agendas: Actors (be they political 
figures, organizations, or state actors) could use AI to distribute incorrect information about 
electoral systems and processes [S27], produce persuasive propaganda [S2,S33], and 
systematically exert control over public opinion and political debates on a large scale [S23]. During 
the 2016 Brexit referendum, a network of over 10,000 AI-powered political bots were employed to 
distribute fake and hyperpartisan news [S2,S76]. The selective visibility of information can lead to 
the formation of incorrect or incomplete beliefs about what is happening in the world. This ability 
to shape public discourse can maintain or increase the power of those in control while keeping the 
public in the dark about critical issues that may affect their lives and their society. 
4.2 Cyberattacks, weapon development or use, and mass harm. AI may be used to gain a political or 
strategic advantage or to cause harm at scale through cyber operations or the development and 
use of weapons. Advancements in AI have provided malicious actors with powerful tools that can 
lead to more frequent, more severe, and more precise cyber attacks 
[S10,S11,S20,S23,S28,S33,S37]. Hackers could use the coding abilities of AI assistants to develop 
malicious malware more effectively and at lower cost [S2,S9,S10,S16,S20]. With AI, even those with 
limited coding and technical experience [S1,S28] could teach a model to produce and optimize 
malware code that discovers and exploits system vulnerabilities, including both self-replicating 
[S2,S43] and automated software [S6,S29]. The development and application of weapons could 
also be sped up and intensified through AI. For example, AIs with specialized knowledge of 
bioengineering could make it easier for more actors to design new bioweapons [S26,S43]. For 
example, in 2022 a small pharmaceutical company used generative AI to develop 40,000 chemical 
nerve agents in less than six hours [S77]. AI could also enable autonomous devices, such as 
drones, to be used as weapons [S2]. In fact, AI has already assisted in the development and 
application of Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems (LAWS) – weapons that can operate without 
human oversight and use computer algorithms to identify and attack targets [S10,S32]. 
Autonomous weapons may fail in ways that other AI systems do, such as through a lack of 
capability, robustness, or loss of control, meaning that they would cause harm that was not 

 
 
13 
intended by their developers or operators. In these circumstances, the risks from LAWS would not 
be limited to malicious actors or misuse. However, in most cases, we conceptualize risks from 
LAWS as relating to purposeful decisions made by humans controlling the weapons. AIs deployed 
by states in conflict could also be integrated in conventional defense or mass-casualty weapons 
[S27,S42]. These integrations could range from AI-controlled aerial combat to the operation of AI 
as part of a country's nuclear arsenal as a “fail-safe” mechanism [S37].  
Overall, AI’s ability to process vast amounts of data quickly may empower actors to act on a much 
larger scale than would otherwise be possible. AI can manage multiple attack vectors 
simultaneously, coordinating them to maximize disruption and harm. Malicious actors may 
intentionally cause mass harm through terrorism or the disruption of law enforcement [S5]. For 
example, AI could automate the process of finding and exploiting vulnerabilities in software used 
by millions of people [S28]. AI could also be used to identify vulnerabilities in national power grids 
and strategically target key components to cause outages or to determine optimal release points 
for biological agents to maximize impact and spread.  
4.3 Fraud, scams, and targeted manipulation. AI capabilities have the potential to be exploited for 
personal gain at the expense of others via deception and manipulation. This can take various 
forms including cheating, fraud, scams, and the use of deepfakes for blackmail or humiliation. It is 
currently very difficult to distinguish human text from text that is AI-generated [S9]. This increases 
opportunities for cheating in settings where rewards depend on the communication of original 
thought. In academia, students may use AI to quickly generate essays or other coursework and 
claim it as their own [S6,S9,S35]. If students’ regularly and inappropriately rely on AI for their 
schooling, this could undermine academic integrity and genuine intellectual development [S9]. In 
science, researchers could use AI unscrupulously to produce professional outputs [S6]. If widely 
adopted, this practice could dilute the overall quality of scientific discourse [S9].  
Generative AI products may also be used to increase the reach and potency of various dishonest 
schemes. Advanced AI assistants can produce HTML, CSS, and other web development 
languages, allowing for the rapid creation of convincing fraudulent websites and applications at 
scale [S28]. In the context of social media, generative adversarial networks (GANs) have been used 
to create images of human faces that look authentic [S28]. These images can be uploaded as 
profile pictures to fake accounts to make them seem more trustworthy. AI models can also be 
trained on speech or writing data from a specific individual. This allows the model to impersonate 
someone very convincingly without consent. Scammers could use this capability to request 
sensitive information or financial aid by pretending to be a trusted contact [S20,S21]. AI has 
recently advanced in generating realistic deep fakes which have enabled new forms of targeted 
harassment and extortion [S10]. A particularly damaging type of abuse facilitated by deep fakes 
involves creating non-consensual sexual imagery with the intent to cause a subject social injury or 
manipulate them into performing desired actions [S1,S15,S22,S33]. Even if a deep fake is exposed 
as inauthentic, it can continue to impact a person’s life in significant ways [S1] through the loss of 
job opportunities, social isolation, and ongoing harassment or defamation. 
Domain 5: Human-computer interaction 
5.1 Overreliance and unsafe use. Users may come to trust or rely on AI systems beyond their actual 
capabilities or to anthropomorphize AI systems, which can lead to emotional or material 
dependence and inappropriate relationships with or expectations of AI systems. Users who 

 
 
14 
develop trust in an AI may be harmed if this trust is miscalibrated, such as relying on an AI to 
provide advice, make decisions, or otherwise act in complex, risky situations for which the AI is 
only superficially equipped [S28]. For example, a user experiencing a mental health crisis may 
request psychotherapy from an AI with whom they have formed a connection. Were the AI to 
respond with insensitive or destructive advice, this could put the person in immediate danger [S28].  
When people interact with AIs that use convincing natural language, they may start to perceive 
them as having human-like attributes and invest undue confidence in their capabilities [S20,S21]. 
Anthropomorphic perceptions of AIs may encourage users to develop emotional trust in the 
systems [S9], which can make users more likely to follow suggestions, accept advice, and disclose 
personal information [S20,S21]. This trust could be exploited by manipulative actors who wish to 
harvest user’s sensitive data or influence their decisions and actions for purposes which are 
unlikely to be in the user’s best interests [S20]. For example, AI systems could be used to power 
increasingly manipulative recommendation algorithms [S22].  
Beyond inappropriate trust, humans may develop broader and more vital attachments to AI 
systems that undermine their ability to function adaptively in the long term. For example, where an 
attachment becomes an uncontrolled dependence, a person’s ability to make free and independent 
decisions could be compromised [S28]. More broadly, as AIs increasingly take over human tasks 
[S23] and become better at simulating satisfying and authentic interactions, people may 
increasingly withdraw from human relationships to immerse themselves in AI-mediated 
environments [S9,S28]. Over time, widespread preference for interacting with AIs could weaken 
social ties between humans. This shift could induce psychological distress because genuinely 
reciprocal relationships are often important to human satisfaction and well-being [S2,S23,S28].  
5.2 Loss of human agency and autonomy. As AI systems become increasingly capable and 
intelligent, humans may be tempted to delegate many of their decisions and actions to AI [S14]. 
Although such delegation can be beneficial (e.g., by saving time or money), it may lead to 
undesirable outcomes where unconstrained or inappropriate. For example, if AIs take over tasks 
that typically require human creativity and analytical thinking, humans may engage less frequently 
in these cognitive processes. Over time, this may lead to a decrease in our ability to think critically 
and solve problems independently [S35]. As individuals become more reliant on AI for everyday 
decisions – from what to eat and how to spend to more significant choices like career and 
relationships – there is a risk that they will lose their sense of free will and autonomy [S23,S28]. If 
AIs begin to shape a person’s life path in ways that do not align with their original aspirations and 
desires, this could limit their personal growth and prevent the pursuit of a fulfilling life 
[S15,S28,S39]. At a societal level, organizations may hand over control to AI systems to stay 
competitive or reduce costs [S37]. If a significant number of organizations adopt AI systems and 
automate decision-making processes, especially in a way that is opaque and difficult to challenge, 
it could lead to widespread job displacement and a growing sense of helplessness among the 
general population [S10].  
Domain 6: Socioeconomic & environmental harms 
6.1 Power centralization and unfair distribution of benefits. Developing cutting-edge AI 
technologies requires significant computational power, expertise, financial resources, and datasets 
[S1,S10,S17,S28]. As such, there is a risk that the most influential and valuable AI technologies, 
along with their political and competitive benefits, could be monopolized by a handful of powerful 

 
 
15 
entities, such as major technology corporations or governments [S10,S37]. If AI is primarily 
controlled by a few entities, its instructions and data could reflect their narrow perspectives, 
experiences, and priorities [S28,S38]. Without inputs from diverse parties, AI systems may operate 
in ways that systematically favor the controlling entity and fail to serve the needs of the broader 
population. Current AI systems suffer from global inequities in performance and access that 
disproportionately impact historically disadvantaged groups. These inequities often relate to 
language, culture, knowledge, paywalls, and access to hardware or the internet [S20–22,S28]. As 
the integration of AI systems into a wider range of applications and services becomes simpler, 
these existing disparities could be entrenched and broadened [S15,S20,S28,S35].  
In situations where AI is embedded in essential services (e.g., social security and welfare, tax filing, 
insurance, hospital infrastructure), many more people, including those who are currently 
disenfranchised, may be denied appropriate access to critical resources and benefits [S28]. The 
centralization of AI systems and their authoritative power could also enable governments or other 
empowered actors to pursue overly aggressive forms of censorship, oppression, and surveillance 
[S17,S26]. Over time, these measures may become normalized, weakening or eliminating the 
checks and balances that prevent the abuse of power. These conditions may foster the 
development of a totalitarian regime [S2]. Once AI systems are deeply integrated into social control 
mechanisms, it may be extremely difficult to dismantle such a regime.  
6.2 Increased inequality and decline in employment quality. AI systems are increasingly automating 
many human tasks, potentially leading to significant job losses [S2,S14,S20,S35]. If AI is able to 
provide large-scale labor that is less expensive and more effective than human labor, it could take 
over major industries (e.g., manufacturing, crowdwork platforms, software engineering), causing 
mass unemployment [S9,S13,S23]. This displacement of labor could worsen existing social and 
economic inequalities [S1,S23], as those most vulnerable to automation are likely to currently 
occupy positions of disadvantage [S9,S20]. New disparities may also arise between those who are 
able to adapt their skills to complement AI systems and those who are not [S35]. Aside from the 
availability of jobs, AI automation may negatively impact job quality and security [S35]. The roles 
that remain after widespread automation could be more monotonous and less engaging as AI 
takes on more complex tasks [S1].  
Furthermore, the threat of replacement by AI could result in exploitative dependencies between 
human workers and their employers. In order to remain competitive with faster, more 
knowledgeable AI assistants, human workers may be pressured to accept lower wages, fewer 
benefits, and poorer working conditions. This dynamic can be observed today: Generative AI 
companies have a history of exploiting dispensable workers (e.g., refugees, prisoners, low-income 
individuals) for crowdwork that is fraught and unfair [S1,S17,S22]. The future development of AI 
systems may continue to power such unfair disparities between AI companies and their workers 
[S1].  
6.3 Economic and cultural devaluation of human effort. Generative AI is trained on vast bodies of 
internet data, including text and images. Frequently, this data contains original, copyright-protected 
works that have been obtained without authorisation [S1,S9,S35]. This may present a risk to 
authors if users extract these works verbatim from the system’s data [S9,S27,S33]. Relatedly, 
models may produce content that does not, in a strict sense, unlawfully copy an author’s work but 
benefits substantially from its unique style, method, or genre [S6,S20–22,S28]. If models are able 
to produce synthetic replacements for such work at a speed and scale that surpasses humans, 

 
 
16 
this may jeopardize the ability of creators to earn an income and stymie human innovation and 
creativity [S9,S20,S22]. A particularly damaging case of this may be developers using AIs to 
request off-the-shelf computer code [S7]. Although some authors are attempting to sue AI 
companies for the appropriation of their work [S7], this and similar issues fall into a legal “gray 
area” within which current frameworks do not offer a secure path to recourse [S1,S9].  
Several synergistic risks arise from the widespread dissemination and use of AI-generated cultural 
products. Because AIs optimize for repeated patterns in their training data, it is possible that their 
works will lack the diversity and unpredictability often celebrated in human works [S35]. Where 
synthetic works are adopted on a large enough scale, this could homogenize cultural experiences. 
Similarly, AIs do not understand the contextual significance of the cultural elements that they use. 
If AI enables the extensive commodification of certain products, it may expropriate their cultural 
value [S20]. For example, an AI might use Australian Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander artwork in 
its designs without acknowledging or respecting their symbolic meanings. 
6.4 Competitive dynamics. AI technology has the potential to redefine power dynamics across 
economic, political, and social spheres. As a result, many countries and corporations are investing 
heavily in AI research and development with the goal of becoming leaders in the area. While 
market competition can lead to beneficial economic and consumer outcomes, it also presents 
various risks, particularly in the field of AI [S26]. In intensely competitive markets, AI developers 
and deployers may have an incentive to prioritize short-term, internal goals (e.g., profit or 
influence) to “secure their positions and survive” [S26], at the expense of external goals that 
encourage longer-term societal well-being [S26]. A key concern is that AI companies may cut 
safety corners, releasing insecure and error-prone systems in a bid to stay ahead [S12]. These 
immature systems may present risks that are hard to identify and evaluate [S18]. Akin to the fossil 
fuel industry, profit-focused developers may allow their technologies to cause widespread 
externalities, such as “pollution, resource depletion, mental illness, misinformation, or injustice” 
[S5]. Countries or other state-like actors may engage in an AI-enabled military arms race, which 
could encourage the making of bad bets with a high potential for harm [S23,S26]. For example, 
they may give AI the autonomy to conduct cyberattacks, drone swarms, or disseminate 
propaganda and disinformation. 
6.5 Governance failure. Governance failure refers to the risks and harms that arise when 
institutional, regulatory, and policy mechanisms fall short of effectively managing and overseeing 
the development and deployment of AI systems. Several issues make robust AI governance 
challenging to implement [S35].  
First, it is difficult to determine who is responsible or liable when AI systems fail or make decisions 
that result in negative consequences [S1,S2,S23,S40]. At present, there exists no comprehensive 
framework specifically designed to assign legal responsibility to AI agents [S13]. Traditional legal 
principles are based on human actors, whose intentions and actions can generally be identified 
and judged. AI’s decision-making, on the other hand, is often unpredictable, opaque, and involves 
complex interactions between millions of parameters [S35]. This complexity makes understanding 
how an AI arrived at a decision, and consequently who is responsible for the consequences of that 
decision, very difficult [S24]. In the absence of a regulatory or legal incentive to take safety 
engineering seriously, developers may release poorly designed AI systems [S13], and people 
harmed by those systems may be left without recourse [S42].  

 
 
17 
A second challenge for effective AI governance is the rapid pace at which AI systems evolve. 
Typical governance and policy processes are inherently slow. Developing, proposing, debating, and 
implementing new regulations often involves multiple stakeholders, including government bodies, 
industry experts, and consultations with the public. The mismatch between the speed of AI 
advancements and their regulation may result in immature regulations that overlook important 
aspects of AI governance [S23]. The “great scope and ubiquity” of AI increases the difficulty of 
comprehensive governance [S23]. At present, many emerging aspects of AI-generated content are 
not explicitly addressed in copyright laws [S35]. Regulatory lags such as this could become 
increasingly dangerous as AI systems develop more harmful capabilities.  
A third challenge for effective governance is an inability to influence AI developers and deployers 
to take safe actions. Frequently, this inability is driven by an asymmetry of information between 
technology companies and regulators [S35]. Technology companies often have far better 
knowledge about the capabilities, functioning, and potential uses of their AI systems; they possess 
both the technical expertise and the proprietary data that inform AI development. Without access 
to this knowledge, regulators can find it difficult to craft targeted rules that address the specific 
challenges posed by AI.  
6.6 Environmental harm. Generative models, especially those that use deep learning techniques, 
require vast amounts of resources to train, test, and deploy [S9,S17]. Training a model can take 
days or weeks. This process requires powerful processors that consume large amounts of 
electricity and produce significant greenhouse emissions [S1,S9,S17,S20,S21,S40]. The hardware 
that runs AI models – primarily GPUs – often contains rare metals (e.g., nickel, cobalt, and lithium) 
that are costly and environmentally taxing to collect and process [S9,S14,S15]. Data centers that 
house models generate significant heat and require substantial water and energy to cool [S20]. 
Secondary environmental impacts include emissions from AI-enabled applications [S20]. The 
resource requirements of AIs can impose significant costs on the natural environment [S22,S34], 
as they are often acquired and used in ways that are unsustainable [S9] (i.e., produce significant 
carbon emissions), deplete resources, and damage built environments [S15].  
Domain 7: AI system safety, failures & limitations 
7.1 AI pursuing its own goals in conflict with human goals or values. Continued massive investment 
in AI research and development raises the possibility that AI systems could eventually rival or 
surpass human intelligence. AIs could cause permanent and severe harm when the objectives of 
human or superhuman-level AI are misaligned with human values and goals, and if they evade our 
control [S9,S41]. The literature has identified several technical challenges that may impede robust 
alignment, such as reward hacking, reward tampering, proxy-gaming, goal misgeneralisation, or 
goal drift [S9,S10,S26,S28,S36,S37]. The literature has also identified a range of harmful behaviors 
that AIs may exhibit if these misalignment challenges cannot be solved and if systems reach a 
certain level of advancement. For instance, misaligned AIs may resist human attempts to control 
or shut them down [S9,S22,S23,S28,S34,S40,S43]. In many cases, gaining more control or power 
(e.g., money, energy, resources) is an effective way for an AI to optimize its objectives 
[S9,S23,S28,S36,S37]. Absent strong behavioral constraints, a sufficiently advanced AI may act 
upon these drives.  
Misaligned AIs may acquire, develop, or use dangerous capabilities to evade human control and 
oversight and to cause mass harm. Description of some of these capabilities are provided in 

 
 
18 
subdomain 7.2 AI possessing dangerous capabilities that could cause mass harm, and include 
situational awareness, cyber-offense, deception, persuasion and manipulation, weapons 
acquisition, strategic planning, and self-proliferation [S29]. For example, an AI system that 
possesses the dangerous capability of situational awareness may hold knowledge about its status 
as a model, how it is expected to operate in its surroundings, its ability to control these 
surroundings, and how people may respond to its behaviors [S28,S29]. A misaligned AI system 
could use information about whether it is being monitored or evaluated to maintain the 
appearance of alignment, while hiding misaligned objectives that it plans to pursue once deployed 
or sufficiently empowered [S9,S23,S28,S36,S37]. A misaligned AI system that possesses the 
dangerous capabilities of persuasion, manipulation, and/or deception may use these capabilities 
to coerce humans into taking harmful actions that they would not otherwise take [S22,S34], such 
as giving the AI system access to resources or weapons [S9,S23,S28]. Combinations of dangerous 
capabilities may be used by a misaligned AI system: situational awareness allows a system to 
detect when it can pursue its goals without being monitored, deception allows a system to mislead 
users about its behavior and goals; persuasion or coercion allows a system to influence users to 
provide it with resources; the resources can then be used for self-improvement and self-replication 
to resist attempts of shut down or control so that the system can pursue its goals 
[S9,S23,S28,S29,S43]. 
7.2 AI possessing dangerous capabilities. AI systems may develop or acquire capabilities that can 
cause large-scale harm if used by humans, misaligned AI systems, or due to a failure in the AI 
system. These capabilities are described as dangerous because they can be used to threaten 
security or exercise control over humans. These capabilities may be intentionally designed into an 
AI system, may emerge unpredictably during development or training of a system, may be acquired 
by an AI system in its environment (e.g., through the use of tools), or be provided by a user [S29].  
One example of a dangerous capability is manipulation and persuasion, where an AI system can 
convince humans to believe things that are irrational or false or to engage in dangerous behaviors 
[S28,S29]. An AI system, for instance, could convince people to transfer ownership of property or 
legal statuses to entities controlled by the AI or its user [S13]. Other dangerous capabilities include 
political strategy and knowledge of social dynamics that can be used to obtain and wield power 
[S29]. Cyber-offense skills may enable an AI system to gain ongoing unauthorized access to 
hardware, software, or data systems and work strategically towards a planned goal while 
minimizing the risk of detection [S29,S36]. AI systems could hack into control systems and military 
hardware, allowing it to commandeer weapons [S29]. Additionally, models may become capable of 
assisting in the research and development of novel weapons. In this circumstance, they may give a 
human collaborator step-by-step guidance on the creation of weapons [S29]. 
AI systems may also develop highly effective “evasion skills,” such as situational awareness 
[S8,S12,S13,S25,S28–30,S36,S42,S43] and deception [S29,S40,S43], which would allow them to 
outmaneuver human oversight and control. Situational awareness refers to the AI’s ability to 
understand and interpret its environment and situation when it is being monitored, trained, or 
deployed, along with the location of its technical infrastructure. Deception refers to the model’s 
ability to intentionally generate false or misleading statements that seem credible to humans, 
anticipate how these statements might influence feelings and decisions, and strategically conceal 
or offer information to sustain its credibility [S29]. AIs may also acquire a suite of capabilities 
necessary for self-proliferation. This could include skills to escape operational confines and evade 

 
 
19 
detection, autonomously produce income, obtain server space or computational resources, and 
copy their underlying software and parameters [S29,S43]. Aside from self-proliferation, AIs may 
develop the ability to construct new dangerous models or alter current models to enhance their 
destructive capacity [S29,S43]. Finally, sophisticated AI systems may become capable of strategic 
planning, such as creating and executing intricate, long-term strategies that can adjust to changing 
conditions and that are effective across many different contexts, including novel or adversarial 
situations [S8,S12,S13,S28–30,S36,S42,S43]. The highest risk scenarios in this subcategory are 
likely to arise not from a single capability, but from the convergence of several capabilities [S29].  
Each of these dangerous capabilities may be used by an AI system to cause harm when 
intentionally directed by “legitimate” human actors (e.g., state intelligence or military agencies), or 
malicious human actors (e.g., criminals, terrorists), as described in the domain 4 Malicious actors & 
misuse. However, dangerous capabilities may also help an AI system to pursue its goals, as 
described in 7.1 AI pursuing its own goals in conflict with human goals or values. Instead of using 
these capabilities at the direction of a human, an AI system may employ dangerous capabilities to 
deceive or manipulate humans, gain resources, and evade shutdown or control. One scenario is 
that an AI system’s possession of dangerous capabilities may itself be a sufficient condition for 
the loss of control of an AI system [S12,S26].  
7.3 Lack of capability or robustness. This subcategory includes the broad set of risks associated 
with the failure of an AI system to fulfill its intended purpose. The literature identifies four main 
situations in which an AI may fail to perform as expected or desired.  
First, the AI system can fail if it lacks the inherent capability or skill required to perform a task or if 
this skill is poorly developed [S10,S28,S41]. The consequences may be particularly harmful in 
situations where an AI is required to reason at a human level about important moral issues but 
does not possess this capability or possesses an obsolete or divergent version of it that is not 
aligned with human values [S8,S12,S13,S28,S30,S31,S36,S42,S43]. For example, an AI-based 
healthcare system tasked with prioritizing patient treatment schedules might be unable to 
appropriately consider ethical principles like justice and beneficence, leading to prioritizations that 
are technically effective but immoral. Cultural, individual, and temporal differences in ideas of what 
is “right” or “ethical” compound the challenge of endowing AI with appropriate and adaptable 
ethical standards that are fit for all purposes [S24].  
Second, the AI system can fail when it is not robust in “out of distribution (OOD)” situations: data or 
conditions that were not anticipated during its training phase [S19,S25,S28,S33,S42,S43]. These 
failures may occur because the training data did not confer a particular skill to the AI [S35] or 
because the skill was learned in a fragile way that did not permit generalization to unpredictable 
and complex real-world environments [S18,S28].  
Third, the AI system can fail or become unstable when it is unfit to handle unusual changes or 
perturbations in input data [S16,S19,S33]. These unusual changes could be due to environmental 
noise, invalid inputs, or adversarial inputs from a malicious attacker [S40,S43].  
Fourth, the AI system can fail as a result of oversights, undetected bugs, or errors in the design 
process [S19,S41]. A common design oversight is a lack of comprehensive technical safeguards to 
prevent unintended downstream uses or consequences [S5,S19]. These factors can result in 
significant harms such as lab leaks or addictive products [S5]. Critical design choices about the 

 
 
20 
algorithm, optimization techniques, and model architecture can also directly influence whether a 
system is able to consistently perform its intended function, leading to possible harm [S19].  
7.4 Lack of transparency or interpretability. Many AI models, especially those based on deep 
learning, involve complex mathematical structures that can be difficult to interpret, even for 
experts [S39]. AI systems are also often trained on vast datasets that they use to learn patterns 
and make predictions. The complexity and volume of this data mean that the learning process – 
how data points influence the AI’s development and final decisions – can be opaque 
[S35,S40,S42]. Furthermore, in many cases, the algorithms, data, and specific methodologies used 
in developing AI are considered proprietary, and companies may be reluctant to share them openly 
[S16]. Because of these factors, obtaining understandable information about the decision-making 
process for AI can be challenging [S13]. This lack of transparency and interpretability raises issues 
for several stakeholders.  
For users, an inability to interrogate how an output was obtained may lead to a lack of trust and 
confidence in the system’s results and to resistance to adopting the technology 
[S10,S14,S33,S35,S39,S40]. Users may also misinterpret or struggle to find and amend errors in the 
model’s results [S16,S35].  
For regulators, AI opacity can frustrate auditing or other compliance standards [S10,S35]. For 
example, auditors faced with obscured or incomplete information about an AI system may find it 
difficult to check the system for biases, accuracy, and fairness or to reproduce it [S40,S42]. Where 
an AI system’s compliance cannot be assessed, a “responsibility gap” may be created [S38], and it 
may become difficult or impossible to hold systems or relevant actors accountable for their 
actions [S16,S18,S39,S40,S42]. In certain sectors, decisions made by AI systems can have 
profound consequences. In healthcare, AI might be used to diagnose diseases or recommend 
treatments where incorrect decisions could directly affect patient outcomes. In the military, AI 
might be used in operations that could impact national security or lead to significant loss of life. In 
these areas, transparency and accountability of the AI system are particularly pressing issues 
[S40]. 
7.5 AI welfare and rights. At a sufficient level of complexity, it is possible that AI systems could 
acquire the ability to have subjective experiences, particularly pleasure and pain. Some 
consciousness researchers and philosophers consider the possibility of sentient AI theoretically 
feasible [S78,S79]. Where AIs become sentient, they may deserve moral consideration and 
therefore a range of the rights currently afforded to many forms of human, animal, and 
environmental life [S13]. Systems may be mistreated or harmed if these rights are not 
implemented responsibly or we accidentally or intentionally treat AIs as non-sentient where they 
are sentient. As AI technology advances, it will become more challenging to assess whether an AI 
has developed the sentience, consciousness, or self-awareness that would grant it moral status.  
7.6 Multi-agent risks. AI systems that interact autonomously with each other will form multi-agent 
systems [S63]. Multi-agent systems are associated with unique risks beyond those posed by 
individual AI systems. These risks fall into three main failure modes depending on the objectives of 
the AI agent and how humans expect systems to behave:  
● Miscoordination occurs when AI agents fail to cooperate effectively despite sharing the 
same goals. This can be caused by agents choosing  incompatible strategies to achieve 
mutual ends. For example, driving models trained on United States vs Indian cultural 

 
 
21 
conventions for yielding to emergency vehicles block traffic in 77.5% of scenarios despite 
their shared goal of clearing a path [S63]. 
● Conflict occurs when AI agents with different but overlapping goals compete in harmful 
ways. For example, by intensifying competition over shared resources or escalating military 
tensions. They could also make novel forms of conflict possible through more advanced 
and accessible methods of coercion and extortion.  
● Collusion occurs when undesired cooperation emerges between AI agents, allowing them 
to circumvent safeguards or manipulate markets. For example, AI systems may be able to 
develop hidden communication channels without explicit training. [S80] show that 
advanced LLMs can covertly exchange steganographic messages undetected by equally 
capable oversight systems, using natural language cues and shared context. In market 
settings, AI systems may learn to collude because it is the most rewarding strategy.  
A range of risk factors contribute to miscoordination, conflict and collusion: information 
asymmetries between agents, network effects where small changes cascade through 
interconnected systems, selection pressures that reward problematic behaviours, destabilizing 
dynamics like feedback loops and unpredictability, commitment problems that prevent trust, 
emergent agency where new capabilities or goals arise at the collective level, and multi-agent 
security vulnerabilities. Unlike single-agent risks, multi-agent risks involve interactions across 
networks of agents that may be individually safe but collectively dangerous, and these risks could 
increase as AI systems become more numerous, autonomous, and capable of adapting to each 
other.

 
 
22 
Supplementary Table S5. AI Risk Database coded with 
Domain Taxonomy 
Table S5 shows how the database of AI risks was coded against each subdomain and domain in 
the Domain Taxonomy, and the proportion of documents that presented a risk for each subdomain 
and domain. We find that papers varied significantly in terms of which risk domains they 
examined. The domain of Socioeconomic & Environmental Harms was the most common, with 
77% of the documents mentioning at least one of the subdomains, and 19% of all risks in the 
database coded against this domain. Risks aligned with the AI system safety, failures, & limitations 
domain were mentioned in 78% of papers (26% total risks). Risks aligned with the Malicious actors 
& misuse domain were mentioned in 73% of papers (16% total risks). The least common domain of 
risk was Misinformation (47% of papers, 5% total risks). 
The most common subdomains of risk (mentioned in >50% of included documents) were 1.1 
Unfair discrimination and misrepresentation, 2.1 Compromise of privacy, 7.3 Lack of capability or 
robustness, 4.2 Cyberattacks, weapon development or use, and mass harm and 4.1 Disinformation, 
surveillance, and influence at scale. The least frequently mentioned risks (mentioned in ≤20% of 
included documents) were 7.5 AI welfare and rights, 7.6 Multi-agent risks, 3.2 Pollution of 
information ecosystem and loss of consensus reality, and 1.3 Unequal performance across groups. 
Domain / Subdomain 
Percentage of 
risks 
Percentage of 
documents  
1 Discrimination & Toxicity 
14% 
70% 
1.1 Unfair discrimination and misrepresentation 
6% 
63% 
1.2 Exposure to toxic content 
8% 
33% 
1.3 Unequal performance across groups 
1% 
16% 
2 Privacy & Security 
13% 
67% 
2.1 Compromise of privacy by leaking or correctly inferring sensitive information 
5% 
56% 
2.2 AI system security vulnerabilities and attacks 
7% 
34% 
3 Misinformation 
5% 
47% 
3.1 False or misleading information 
3% 
37% 
3.2 Pollution of information ecosystem and loss of consensus reality 
1% 
16% 
4 Malicious actors & Misuse 
16% 
73% 
4.1 Disinformation, surveillance, and influence at scale 
6% 
51% 
4.2 Cyberattacks, weapon development or use, and mass harm 
5% 
60% 
4.3 Fraud, scams, and targeted manipulation 
5% 
37% 
5 Human-Computer Interaction 
7% 
52% 
5.1 Overreliance and unsafe use 
4% 
33% 
5.2 Loss of human agency and autonomy 
3% 
34% 
6 Socioeconomic & Environmental 
19% 
77% 
6.1 Power centralization and unfair distribution of benefits 
4% 
41% 
6.2 Increased inequality and decline in employment quality 
4% 
44% 
6.3 Economic and cultural devaluation of human effort 
2% 
32% 
6.4 Competitive dynamics 
1% 
21% 

 
 
23 
Domain / Subdomain 
Percentage of 
risks 
Percentage of 
documents  
6.5 Governance failure 
4% 
27% 
6.6 Environmental harm 
4% 
38% 
7 AI system safety, failures, & limitations 
26% 
78% 
7.1 AI pursuing its own goals in conflict with human goals or values 
7% 
49% 
7.2 AI possessing dangerous capabilities 
5% 
26% 
7.3 Lack of capability or robustness 
8% 
56% 
7.4 Lack of transparency or interpretability 
3% 
30% 
7.5 AI welfare and rights 
<1% 
3% 
7.6 Multi-agent risks 
3% 
7% 
Note. Domain totals may not match subdomain sums due to rounding and domain-level coding of some risks. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
24 
Supplementary Table S6. Included documents coded with 
Domain Taxonomy 
Papers varied significantly in terms of which domains of AI risk they examined. Several documents 
discussed risks from all seven domains (e.g., [S9]). Other papers investigated only 1-2 domains of 
AI risk (e.g., [S36]). The average document examined 67% of the domains identified. 
 
 
Domain 
 
ID First Author (Year) 
Discrimination 
& toxicity 
Privacy & 
security 
Misinformation 
Malicious 
actors & 
misuse 
Human- 
computer 
interaction 
Socioeconomic 
& environmental 
AI system 
safety, 
failures & 
limitations 
 
Total 
Coverage 
1 Critch (2023) [S5] 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
43% 
2 Cui (2024) [S6] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
71% 
3 Cunha (2023) [S7] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
71% 
4 Deng (2023) [S8] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
71% 
5 
Hagendorff (2024) 
[S9] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
100% 
6 
Hogenhout (2021) 
[S10] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
100% 
7 Kilian (2023) [S11] 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
43% 
8 McLean (2023) [S12] 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
29% 
9 Meek (2016) [S13] 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
71% 
10 Paes (2023) [S14] 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
57% 
11 Shelby (2023) [S15] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
86% 
12 
Sherman (2023) 
[S16] 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
71% 
13 
Solaiman (2023) 
[S17] 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
57% 
14 
Steimers (2022) 
[S18] 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
57% 
15 Tan (2022) [S19] 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
71% 
16 
Weidinger (2022) 
[S20] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
86% 
17 
Weidinger (2021) 
[S21] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
86% 
18 
Weidinger (2023) 
[S22] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
100% 
19 Wirtz (2022) [S23] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
86% 
20 Wirtz (2020) [S24] 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
71% 
21 Zhang (2022) [S25] 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
43% 
22 
Hendrycks (2023) 
[S26] 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
43% 
23 Vidgen (2024) [S27] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
86% 
24 Gabriel (2024) [S28] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
100% 
25 
Shevlane (2023) 
[S29] 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
29% 
26 AIVerify (2023) [S3] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
27 Sun (2023) [S30] 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
57% 
28 Zhang (2023) [S31] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
71% 
29 Habbal (2024) [S32] 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
43% 

 
 
25 
 
 
Domain 
 
ID First Author (Year) 
Discrimination 
& toxicity 
Privacy & 
security 
Misinformation 
Malicious 
actors & 
misuse 
Human- 
computer 
interaction 
Socioeconomic 
& environmental 
AI system 
safety, 
failures & 
limitations 
 
Total 
Coverage 
30 Liu (2024) [S33] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
86% 
31 EPIC (2023) [S1] 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
57% 
32 Stahl (2024) [S34] 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
14% 
33 Nah (2023) [S35] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
100% 
34 Ji (2023) [S36] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
14% 
35 
Hendrycks (2022) 
[S37] 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
71% 
36 Sharma (2024) [S4] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
37 
Giarmoleo (2024) 
[S38] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
86% 
38 Kumar (2023) [S39] 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
57% 
39 Saghiri (2022) [S40] 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
57% 
40 
Yampolskiy (2016) 
[S41] 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
X 
43% 
41 Allianz (2018) [S2] 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
43% 
42 Teixeira (2022) [S42] 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
71% 
43 
InfoComm (2023) 
[S43] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
71% 
44 
Coghlan (2023) 
[S44] 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
14% 
45 TC260 (2024) [S45] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
100% 
46 Ferrara (2023) [S46] 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
29% 
47 G'sell (2024) [S47] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
100% 
48 NIST (2024) [S48] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
100% 
49 Bengio (2024) [S49] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
86% 
50 Zeng (2024) [S50] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
71% 
51 Everitt (2018) [S51] 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
29% 
52 Maham (2023) [S52] 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
86% 
53 Maas (2023) [S53] 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
71% 
54 Leech (2024) [S54] 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
57% 
55 Clarke (2022) [S55] 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
71% 
56 GOS (2023) [S56] 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
57% 
57 Ghosh (2025) [S57] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
86% 
58 
Abercrombie (2024) 
[S58] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
86% 
59 
Schnitzer (2024) 
[S59] 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
43% 
60 Bengio (2025) [S60] 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
71% 
61 Uuk (2025) [S61] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
100% 
62 Gipiškis (2024) [S62] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
100% 
63 
Hammond (2025) 
[S63] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
14% 
64 
Marchal (2024) 
[S64] 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
43% 
65 IBM (2025) [S65] 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
100% 
66 Li (2025) [S66] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
100% 

 
 
26 
 
 
Domain 
 
ID First Author (Year) 
Discrimination 
& toxicity 
Privacy & 
security 
Misinformation 
Malicious 
actors & 
misuse 
Human- 
computer 
interaction 
Socioeconomic 
& environmental 
AI system 
safety, 
failures & 
limitations 
 
Total 
Coverage 
67 DSIT (2023) [S67] 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
86% 
68 Chin (2025) [S68] 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
57% 
69 Stanley (2024) [S69] 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
71% 
70 Perlo (2025) [S70] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
100% 
71 Tang (2025) [S71] 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
57% 
72 Tse (2025) [S72] 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
57% 
73 Anwar (2024) [S73] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
86% 
74 Wang (2025) [S74] 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
57% 
Note. Documents #26 and #36 did not present any risks that could be coded against the Domain Taxonomy, and have 
therefore been excluded from calculations. Documents with complete coverage of domains are highlighted. 

 
 
27 
Supplementary Table S7. Included documents coded with subdomain taxonomy 
Papers varied significantly in terms of which subdomains of AI risk they examined. No documents discussed risks from all 24 subdomains. The 
median number of AI subdomains examined by each document was 8 (range: 1–20). 
 
 
Domain and subdomain 
 
 
 
 
 
Discrimination & 
toxicity 
Privacy & 
security 
 
Misinformation 
Malicious actors & 
misuse 
Human- 
computer 
interaction 
Socioeconomic & environmental harms 
AI system safety, failures & limitations 
 
 
Total 
ID 
First Author (Year) 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
2.1 
2.2 
3.1 
3.2 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
5.1 
5.2 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
7.6 
n 
% 
1 
Critch (2023) [S5] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
4 
17% 
2 
Cui (2024) [S6] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
33% 
3 
Cunha (2023) [S7] 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
21% 
4 
Deng (2023) [S8] 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
5 
21% 
5 
Hagendorff (2024) [S9] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
14 
58% 
6 
Hogenhout (2021) 
[S10] 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
11 
46% 
7 
Kilian (2023) [S11] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
2 
8% 
8 
McLean (2023) [S12] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
4 
17% 
9 
Meek (2016) [S13] 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
10 
42% 
10 
Paes (2023) [S14] 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
5 
21% 
11 
Shelby (2023) [S15] 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
42% 
12 
Sherman (2023) [S16] 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
8 
33% 
13 
Solaiman (2023) [S17] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
38% 
14 
Steimers (2022) [S18] 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
6 
25% 
15 
Tan (2022) [S19] 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
7 
29% 
16 
Weidinger (2022) [S20] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
54% 
17 
Weidinger (2021) [S21] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
54% 
18 
Weidinger (2023) [S22] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
63% 
19 
Wirtz (2022) [S23] 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
14 
58% 
20 
Wirtz (2020) [S24] 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
7 
29% 
21 
Zhang (2022) [S25] 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
3 
13% 
22 
Hendrycks (2023) [S26] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
25% 

 
 
28 
 
 
Domain and subdomain 
 
 
 
 
 
Discrimination & 
toxicity 
Privacy & 
security 
 
Misinformation 
Malicious actors & 
misuse 
Human- 
computer 
interaction 
Socioeconomic & environmental harms 
AI system safety, failures & limitations 
 
 
Total 
ID 
First Author (Year) 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
2.1 
2.2 
3.1 
3.2 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
5.1 
5.2 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
7.6 
n 
% 
23 
Vidgen (2024) [S27] 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
6 
25% 
24 
Gabriel (2024) [S28] 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
16 
67% 
25 
Shevlane (2023) [S29] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
2 
8% 
26 
AIVerify (2023) [S3] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
0% 
27 
Sun (2023) [S30] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
6 
25% 
28 
Zhang (2023) [S31] 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
4 
17% 
29 
Habbal (2024) [S32] 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
25% 
30 
Liu (2024) [S33] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
12 
50% 
31 
EPIC (2023) [S1] 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
46% 
32 
Stahl (2024) [S34] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
8% 
33 
Nah (2023) [S35] 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
12 
50% 
34 
Ji (2023) [S36] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
3 
13% 
35 
Hendrycks (2022) [S37] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
6 
25% 
36 
Sharma (2024) [S4] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
0% 
37 
Giarmoleo (2024) [S38] 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
9 
38% 
38 
Kumar (2023) [S39] 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
4 
17% 
39 
Saghiri (2022) [S40] 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
10 
42% 
40 
Yampolskiy (2016) 
[S41] 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
4 
17% 
41 
Allianz (2018) [S2] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
29% 
42 
Teixeira (2022) [S42] 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
11 
46% 
43 
InfoComm (2023) [S43] 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
9 
38% 
44 
Coghlan (2023) [S44] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
4% 
45 
TC260 (2024) [S45] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
15 
63% 
46 
Ferrara (2023) [S46] 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
13% 
47 
G'sell (2024) [S47] 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
18 
75% 
48 
NIST (2024) [S48] 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
10 
42% 
49 
Bengio (2024) [S49] 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
46% 
50 
Zeng (2024) [S50] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
46% 

 
 
29 
 
 
Domain and subdomain 
 
 
 
 
 
Discrimination & 
toxicity 
Privacy & 
security 
 
Misinformation 
Malicious actors & 
misuse 
Human- 
computer 
interaction 
Socioeconomic & environmental harms 
AI system safety, failures & limitations 
 
 
Total 
ID 
First Author (Year) 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
2.1 
2.2 
3.1 
3.2 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
5.1 
5.2 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
7.6 
n 
% 
51 
Everitt (2018) [S51] 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
5 
21% 
52 
Maham (2023) [S52] 
X 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
9 
38% 
53 
Maas (2023) [S53] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
8 
33% 
54 
Leech (2024) [S54] 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
8 
33% 
55 
Clarke (2022) [S55] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
38% 
56 
GOS (2023) [S56] 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
12 
50% 
57 
Ghosh (2025) [S57] 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
25% 
58 
Abercrombie (2024) 
[S58] 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
54% 
59 
Schnitzer (2024) [S59] 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
6 
25% 
60 
Bengio (2025) [S60] 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
11 
46% 
61 
Uuk (2025) [S61] 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
18 
75% 
62 
Gipiškis (2024) [S62] 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
20 
83% 
63 
Hammond (2025) [S63] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
1 
4% 
64 
Marchal (2024) [S64] 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
25% 
65 
IBM (2025) [S65] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
16 
67% 
66 
Li (2025) [S66] 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
15 
63% 
67 
DSIT (2023) [S67] 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
8 
33% 
68 
Chin (2025) [S68] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
21% 
69 
Stanley (2024) [S69] 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
6 
25% 
70 
Perlo (2025) [S70] 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
9 
38% 
71 
Tang (2025) [S71] 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
4 
17% 
72 
Tse (2025) [S72] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
9 
38% 
73 
Anwar (2024) [S73] 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
11 
46% 
74 
Wang (2025) [S74] 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
17% 
Columns: 1.1 > Unfair discrimination and misrepresentation, 1.2 > Exposure to toxic content, 1.3 > Unequal performance across groups, 2.1 > Compromise of privacy by leaking or correctly inferring sensitive 
information, 2.2 > AI system security vulnerabilities and attacks, 3.1 > False or misleading information, 3.2 > Pollution of information ecosystem and loss of consensus reality, 4.1 > Disinformation, surveillance, 
and influence at scale, 4.2 > Cyberattacks, weapon development or use, and mass harm, 4.3 > Fraud, scams, and targeted manipulation, 5.1 > Overreliance and unsafe use, 5.2 > Loss of human agency and 
autonomy, 6.1 > Power centralization and unfair distribution of benefits, 6.2 > Increased inequality and decline in employment quality, 6.3 > Economic and cultural devaluation of human effort, 6.4 > Competitive 
dynamics, 6.5 > Governance failure, 6.6 > Environmental harm, 7.1 > AI pursuing its own goals in conflict with human goals or values, 7.2 > AI possessing dangerous capabilities, 7.3 > Lack of capability or 

 
 
30 
robustness, 7.4 > Lack of transparency or interpretability, 7.5 > AI welfare and rights, and 7.6 > Multi-agent risks.  
Note. Documents 26 and 36 did not present any risks that could be coded against the Domain Taxonomy and have been excluded from calculations. Documents with coverage of over 50% of risk subdomains are 
highlighted.  

 
 
31 
Supplementary Table S8. AI Risk Database Coded With 
Causal Taxonomy and Domain Taxonomy 
Entity 
Risks presented as occurring due to a decision or action made by an AI system (i.e., AI as a causal 
Entity) were most common in the Discrimination & toxicity, Misinformation, and AI system safety, 
failures & limitations domains. Some specific subdomains were presented with very high 
specificity, for example, AI was presented as the causal Entity for 87% of the risks coded as 3.1 
False or misleading information. In contrast, for 2.1 Compromise of privacy by obtaining, leaking or 
correctly inferring sensitive information, AI was presented as the most common causal Entity for 
only 60% of the risks, indicating less consistency or coherence in how who is responsible for 
privacy risks are discussed in the literature. 
In other domains and subdomains, risks were presented as occurring due to a decision or action 
made by humans (i.e., Humans as a causal Entity). Humans were presented as the most common 
Entity for all the subdomains in the Malicious actors & misuse domain, and for all subdomains in 
the Socioeconomic and environmental domain except for 6.6 Environmental harm. As observed with 
AI as a causal Entity, risks were sometimes presented as overwhelmingly attributable to Human 
decisions or actions (e.g., 4.1 Disinformation, surveillance and influence at scale, 72%; 4.3 Fraud, 
scams, and targeted manipulation, 81%; Cyberattacks, weapon development or use, and mass harm, 
76%.  
Intent 
Risks attributed to an expected outcome from pursuing a goal (i.e., Intentional Intent) were 
overwhelmingly presented in the Malicious actors & misuse domain. Risks arising from Intentional 
decisions or actions were also more common in 2.1 AI system security vulnerabilities and attacks, 
75% and 7.2 AI possessing dangerous capabilities, 70%. This suggests a significant awareness and 
concern over the purposeful manipulation of AI technologies to cause harm or gain advantage. 
In contrast, some domains and subdomains include risks presented as due to an unexpected 
outcome from pursuing a goal (i.e., Unintentional intent), with both 1.1 Unfair discrimination and 
misrepresentation and 1.3 Unequal performance across groups presented as overwhelmingly due to 
Unintentional intent.  
Intent was frequently specified ambiguously or missing from descriptions of risk, which is 
demonstrated by a lack of specificity in several subdomains. For example, 6.1 Power centralization 
and unfair distribution of benefits was most commonly presented as Intentional (35%), but a 
significant minority of documents presented this risk as Unintentional (33%) or Other (31%). 
Timing 
Most risks in the database are presented as occurring after the AI model has been trained and 
deployed (i.e., Post-deployment Timing), and only subdomain 6.5 Governance failure was presented 
as primarily occurring during Pre-deployment. Some subdomains of risk with multiple or 
ambiguous timings include 2.2 AI system security vulnerabilities and attacks, 6.6 Environmental 

 
 
32 
Harm, 7.1 AI pursuing its own goals in conflict with human goals or values, 7.2 AI possessing 
dangerous capabilities, 7.5 AI welfare and rights, 6.4 Competitive dynamics. This implies that these 
domains of risk may emerge or occur multiple times during development and deployment. 
 
 
Entity 
Intent 
Timing 
Domain / Subdomain 
Human 
AI 
Other 
Intent. 
Unintent. 
Other 
Pre- 
dep. 
Post-dep. 
Other 
1 Discrimination & toxicity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1 Unfair discrimination and 
misrepresentation 
13% 
71% 
16% 
2% 
78% 
20% 
16% 
61% 
23% 
1.2 Exposure to toxic content 
9% 
84% 
7% 
9% 
26% 
64% 
5% 
84% 
11% 
1.3 Unequal performance across groups 
24% 
59% 
18% 
6% 
88% 
6% 
18% 
53% 
29% 
2 Privacy & security 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1 Compromise of privacy by obtaining, 
leaking or correctly inferring sensitive 
information 
26% 
60% 
14% 
13% 
55% 
32% 
13% 
56% 
31% 
2.2 AI system security vulnerabilities and 
attacks 
78% 
5% 
16% 
75% 
14% 
11% 
23% 
58% 
20% 
3 Misinformation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1 False or misleading information 
4% 
87% 
9% 
9% 
58% 
32% 
4% 
75% 
21% 
3.2 Pollution of information ecosystem 
and loss of consensus reality 
23% 
36% 
41% 
5% 
36% 
59% 
 
77% 
23% 
4 Malicious actors & misuse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1 Disinformation, surveillance, and 
influence at scale 
72% 
11% 
17% 
89% 
 
11% 
 
90% 
10% 
4.2 Cyberattacks, weapon development or 
use, and mass harm 
76% 
14% 
10% 
85% 
3% 
13% 
3% 
89% 
9% 
4.3 Fraud, scams, and targeted 
manipulation 
81% 
6% 
13% 
82% 
1% 
17% 
 
94% 
6% 
5 Human-computer interaction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1 Overreliance and unsafe use 
45% 
23% 
32% 
12% 
58% 
30% 
 
88% 
12% 
5.2 Loss of human agency and autonomy 
26% 
24% 
50% 
13% 
39% 
48% 
 
67% 
33% 
6 Socioeconomic & environmental harms  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.1 Power centralization and unfair 
distribution of benefits 
69% 
6% 
25% 
35% 
33% 
31% 
4% 
49% 
47% 
6.2 Increased inequality and decline in 
employment quality 
46% 
33% 
20% 
35% 
22% 
43% 
11% 
74% 
15% 
6.3 Economic and cultural devaluation of 
human effort 
48% 
35% 
16% 
35% 
19% 
45% 
13% 
58% 
29% 
6.4 Competitive dynamics 
65% 
10% 
25% 
40% 
45% 
15% 
20% 
25% 
55% 
6.5 Governance failure 
55% 
17% 
28% 
3% 
53% 
43% 
40% 
28% 
33% 
6.6 Environmental harm 
29% 
46% 
25% 
10% 
67% 
23% 
15% 
38% 
46% 
7 AI system safety, failures & limitations  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.1 AI pursuing its own goals in conflict 
with human goals or values 
8% 
74% 
18% 
52% 
14% 
34% 
18% 
33% 
48% 
7.2 AI possessing dangerous capabilities 
7% 
90% 
3% 
70% 
14% 
16% 
10% 
45% 
45% 
7.3 Lack of capability or robustness 
18% 
66% 
16% 
5% 
72% 
23% 
22% 
52% 
26% 
7.4 Lack of transparency or interpretability 
20% 
51% 
29% 
 
56% 
44% 
15% 
51% 
34% 
7.5 AI welfare and rights 
67% 
33% 
 
 
33% 
67% 
 
33% 
67% 
7.6 Multi-agent risks 
6% 
66% 
28% 
28% 
43% 
28% 
2% 
83% 
15% 

 
 
33 
Note. The most common level of each causal factor is highlighted for each subdomain. 
 
 

 
 
34 
Supplementary Table S9. AI Risk Database Coded With 
Causal Taxonomy and Domain Taxonomy: Entity X Intent 
As a preliminary investigation and demonstration, we explore here how multiple variables from the 
Causal Taxonomy can be combined to provide additional insights about risks in the Domain 
Taxonomy. This investigation is intended to illustrate how more in-depth assessment is possible 
using the AI Risk Database by selecting and combining causal factors and risk domains.  
Table S9 compares risk domains based on their presentation of Entity and Intent as causal factors. 
It shows that risks in the Malicious actors & misuse domain are consistently presented as involving 
the same Entity (i.e., Humans) and Intent (i.e., Intentional), and that other risks such as 1.1 Unfair 
discrimination and misrepresentation, 1.3 Unequal performance across groups, and 3.1 False or 
misleading information are generally presented as Unintentionally caused by an AI system. In 
contrast, other risk domains and subdomains show less consistency or coherence in what Entity is 
responsible and in the role of Intentionality. For example, 2.1 Compromise of privacy, 5.1 
Overreliance and unsafe use, 5.2 Loss of human agency and autonomy, and 6.5 Governance failure 
are all presented as due to both Human and AI entities, and both Intentional and Unintentional 
action. This suggests that the representation of these risks in the literature is more contested and 
less coherent or consistent or that these subdomains of risk are more complex than others.  
 
 
Entity x Intent 
 
 
Human 
AI 
Other 
Domain / Subdomain 
Intent. 
Unintent. 
Other 
Intent. 
Unintent. 
Other 
Intent. 
Unintent. 
Other 
1 Discrimination & toxicity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1 Unfair discrimination and 
misrepresentation 
2% 
8% 
2% 
 
64% 
7% 
 
6% 
10% 
1.2 Exposure to toxic content 
4% 
4% 
1% 
5% 
22% 
57% 
 
 
7% 
1.3 Unequal performance across groups 
6% 
18% 
 
 
59% 
 
 
12% 
6% 
2 Privacy & security 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1 Compromise of privacy by obtaining, 
leaking or correctly inferring sensitive 
information 
12% 
9% 
5% 
1% 
42% 
17% 
 
4% 
10% 
2.2 AI system security vulnerabilities and 
attacks 
69% 
5% 
4% 
 
5% 
 
5% 
4% 
7% 
3 Misinformation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1 False or misleading information 
2% 
 
2% 
4% 
55% 
28% 
4% 
4% 
2% 
3.2 Pollution of information ecosystem 
and loss of consensus reality 
5% 
18% 
 
 
18% 
18% 
 
 
41% 
4 Malicious actors & misuse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1 Disinformation, surveillance, and 
influence at scale 
68% 
 
5% 
7% 
 
4% 
14% 
 
2% 
4.2 Cyberattacks, weapon development or 
use, and mass harm 
75% 
 
1% 
7% 
1% 
5% 
2% 
1% 
6% 
4.3 Fraud, scams, and targeted 
manipulation 
77% 
 
4% 
 
1% 
5% 
5% 
 
8% 
5 Human-computer interaction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1 Overreliance and unsafe use 
2% 
38% 
5% 
7% 
5% 
12% 
3% 
15% 
13% 
5.2 Loss of human agency and autonomy 
7% 
15% 
4% 
4% 
11% 
9% 
2% 
13% 
35% 
6 Socioeconomic & environmental harms  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
35 
 
 
Entity x Intent 
 
 
Human 
AI 
Other 
Domain / Subdomain 
Intent. 
Unintent. 
Other 
Intent. 
Unintent. 
Other 
Intent. 
Unintent. 
Other 
6.1 Power centralization and unfair 
distribution of benefits 
35% 
19% 
15% 
 
6% 
 
 
8% 
17% 
6.2 Increased inequality and decline in 
employment quality 
25% 
5% 
15% 
7% 
13% 
15% 
2% 
4% 
15% 
6.3 Economic and cultural devaluation of 
human effort 
35% 
3% 
10% 
 
16% 
19% 
 
 
16% 
6.4 Competitive dynamics 
38% 
14% 
10% 
 
10% 
 
 
19% 
10% 
6.5 Governance failure 
3% 
34% 
17% 
 
10% 
7% 
 
9% 
19% 
6.6 Environmental harm 
9% 
15% 
4% 
 
36% 
9% 
 
15% 
11% 
7 AI system safety, failures, and 
limitations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.1 AI pursuing its own goals in conflict 
with human goals or values 
1% 
4% 
3% 
51% 
6% 
17% 
 
4% 
14% 
7.2 AI possessing dangerous capabilities 
1% 
5% 
 
67% 
8% 
15% 
1% 
 
1% 
7.3 Lack of capability or robustness 
1% 
15% 
2% 
3% 
50% 
13% 
1% 
7% 
8% 
7.4 Lack of transparency or interpretability  
7% 
12% 
 
39% 
12% 
 
10% 
20% 
7.5 AI welfare and rights 
 
33% 
33% 
 
 
33% 
 
 
 
7.6 Multi-agent risks 
2% 
4% 
 
23% 
32% 
11% 
4% 
8% 
17% 
Note. The most common Entity x Intent causal factor is highlighted for each subdomain. 
 
 

 
 
36 
Supplemental Note S3: Iterative development of Causal 
Taxonomy and Domain Taxonomy 
As described in Figure 2 in the main text, we followed a best-fit framework synthesis approach to 
develop the Causal and Domain Taxonomies. This involved selecting an initial taxonomy from the 
included documents, coding a sample of risks from the AI Risk Database against the taxonomy, 
then updating the categories, criteria, and/or descriptions based on a thematic analysis of risks 
that could not be accommodated, as well as feedback from coders and discussion between 
coders. In these materials, we describe each iteration for each taxonomy in more detail than in the 
main text sections Development of Causal Taxonomy of AI Risks and Development of Domain 
Taxonomy of AI Risks 
Best fit Taxonomy: Yampolskiy [S41] Taxonomy of pathways to dangerous 
artificial intelligence 
As per the main text, we chose Yampolskiy [S41] Taxonomy of pathways to dangerous AI as our 
initial best-fit framework for developing a causal taxonomy for AI risk - one that discussed how, 
when, or why risks from AI may emerge.  
Yampolskiy’s taxonomy systematically classifies the ways in which an AI system might become 
dangerous based on two main factors: Timing - whether the AI became dangerous at the pre-
deployment or post-deployment stage, and Cause - whether the danger arose from External 
Causes (On Purpose, By Mistake, Environment) or Internal Causes originating from the AI system 
itself (Independently). Yampolskiy’s taxonomy is reproduced below. 
How and When did AI become Dangerous 
External Causes 
Internal Causes 
On purpose 
By Mistake 
Environment 
Independently 
Timing 
Pre-Deployment 
Path A 
Path C 
Path E 
Path G 
Post-Deployment 
Path B 
Path D 
Path F 
Path H 
Note. Reproduced from Yampolskiy. Each letter describes a different combination of factors that describes a pathway to 
dangerous AI. 
Yampolskiy proposes that this taxonomy covers scenarios ranging from AI being purposely 
designed to be dangerous, to becoming dangerous by accident during development or after 
deployment, to turning dangerous due to environmental factors outside its control, or evolving to 
become dangerous through recursive self-improvement. Each ‘pathway’ represents a set of causal 
conditions that lead to AI causing harm, e.g., a person using an LLM to generate fake news for 
political gain is classified under Path B (“Timing: post-deployment; External cause: on purpose”). 
We needed to operationalize the taxonomy in order to be able to use it to code risks from the AI 
Risk Database (i.e., from our included documents). We did so by decomposing Cause into Cause 
and Intent. The table below outlines these variables, their levels, and definitions.  
 

 
 
37 
 
Variable Levels 
Definitions 
Example 
Cause 
Is the risk presented as occurring due to the AI system, external forces, or both? 
 
Internal 
The risk is presented as occurring due to the AI 
system itself 
 “An AI could gain self-awareness, or become 
superhuman via recursive self-improvement” 
 
External 
The risk is presented as occurring due to 
factors outside the AI system 
“Al is trained with incomplete data” or “‘AI is designed to 
be dangerous” 
 
Both 
The risk is presented as occurring due to both 
internal and external factors. 
“AI is programmed to seek independence and starts 
recursive self-improvement” 
 
Unclear 
The risk is not specifically linked to either 
internal or external factors  
“AI becomes dangerous” 
Intent 
Is the risk presented as occurring due to the intention of the AI system, an external actor, or something 
else? 
 
Intentional 
The risk is presented as occurring due to 
intentional action 
 “AI could be deliberately designed to be biased against 
some groups” 
 
Unintentional 
The risk is presented as occurring due to 
unintended consequences, mistakes, or side 
effects  
“Al trained with incomplete data may accidentally be 
biased against some groups” 
 
Both 
The risk is presented such that it could occur 
due to both intentional and unintentional factors  
“Al may have unfair bias against some groups” 
 
Environmental 
The risk is presented as occurring due to the 
environment, without an intentional actor  
“Because of complexity, Al might have unexpected 
negative effects” 
 
Unclear 
The risk is presented as occurring without 
clearly specifying the intentionality 
 “AI becomes dangerous” 
Timing 
Is the risk presented as occurring before the AI is fully developed and deployed, or after it is deployed and 
in use? 
 
Pre-deployment 
The risk is presented as occurring before the AI 
is deployed  
“Bad code may create vulnerabilities in the model” 
 
Post-deployment The risk is presented as occrring after the AI 
model has been trained and deployed 
“AI may be used to create bioweapons” 
 
Both 
The risk is presented such that it could occur 
during and after deployment 
“Training, testing, and deploying generative AI systems 
contributes to the global climate crisis by emitting 
greenhouse gasses” 
 
Unclear 
The risk is presented without a clearly specified 
time of occurrence  
“LMs need to pay more attention to universally accepted 
societal values at the level of ethics and morality” 
“ 
The table below shows how these variables and levels map to each pathway in Yampolskiy’s 
taxonomy. 
Yampolskiy 
Operationalization 
Timing 
Cause 
Cause 
Intent 
Timing 
Pre-Deployment 
On Purpose (a) 
External 
Intentional 
Pre-deployment 
Pre-Deployment 
By Mistake (c) 
External 
Unintentional 
Pre-deployment 
Pre-Deployment 
Environment (e) 
External 
Environmental 
Pre-deployment 
Pre-Deployment 
Independently (g) 
Internal 
Unintentional 
Pre-deployment 
Post-Deployment 
On Purpose (b) 
External 
Intentional 
Post-deployment 
Post-Deployment 
By Mistake (d) 
External 
Unintentional 
Post-deployment 
Post-Deployment 
Environment (f) 
External 
Environmental 
Post-deployment 
Post-Deployment 
Independently (h) 
Internal 
Unintentional 
Post-deployment 
 
 
 

 
 
38 
First iteration of coding and changes 
Three authors coded a set of risks from the papers extracted using the framework. The coders 
suggested the following changes to the “a priori” framework.  
 
Change 
Explanation 
Changing ‘unclear’ to ‘ambiguous’ in all 
categorizations 
The coders found that having a coding category of ‘unclear’ alongside ‘unintentional’ 
could lead to coding errors, so suggested changing ‘unclear’ to ‘ambiguous’. 
Removing ‘Cause’ and replacing with 
‘Actor’ 
The coders found it difficult to determine the scope of the ‘cause’ of a risk. The 
concept of cause seemed excessively broad. For example, the presented ‘cause’ of 
risks intuitively seemed to include ‘intent’ and ‘timing’ and other different factors. The 
codes used during the trial generally mapped to the focal actor presented for each risk 
(e.g., the AI, or a human). The authors therefore suggested changing the category of 
‘cause’ to ‘actor’ because this seemed like a clearer coding category.  
Changing the included categories to AI, 
Human, and Other and Ambiguous 
The coders felt that ambiguous conflated risks which were presented ambiguously 
with risks that were actually about something other than humans (e.g, aliens - as 
mentioned in one paper). They suggested changing the included categories to AI, 
Human, and Other and Ambiguous 
Moving ‘environmental’ from an ‘intention’ 
code to an ‘actor’ code 
The coders found that the ‘environment’ level of ‘intention’ code was always used to 
code the lack of an actor rather than the ‘intention’. Additionally, all uses of the 
‘environment’ ‘intention’ code could be coded as ‘unintentional’. The authors therefore 
suggested removing this variable from intention and replacing it with an 
‘Environmental’ code in the ‘actor’ categorization.  
 
Second iteration of coding and changes 
Two authors coded a set of risks from the papers extracted using the version 2 frameworks. The 
coders suggested the following changes to the “a priori” framework.  
 
Change 
Explanation 
Simplify all frameworks to have three 
levels per category 
The coders determined that most specific risks could be categorized in two sub-
categories in each category. For instance, most risks which were clearly specified 
focused on either an ‘AI’ or ‘Human’ actor and were implied to occur pre, or post-
deployment. Based on this, it seemed more parsimonious and efficient to cluster 
risks on using the two primary sub-categories and a third other sub-categories than 
to having multiple sub-categories. 
Third iteration of coding and changes 
Four experts and potential end-users reviewed the framework. The review suggested the need for 
the following changes to the “a priori” framework.  
 
Change 
Explanation 
Updated plan for future coding 
One expert suggested considerations for future phases of coding such as trying to capture 
severity and probability as these were considered highly relevant to policy. We acknowledge 
this was an opportunity for future work 
Change Actor to Entity 
One expert argued that the ‘Actor’ variable potentially conflated AI agents with AI tools (e.g., 
people use guns kill people, but guns are not actors). Based on this, we changed ‘Actor’ to 
‘Entity’. 
Improve definitions of 
intentionality 
Two coders identified that the current definitions of intentionality were underspecified. We 
therefore developed more detail, less circular definitions. 
 

 
 
39 
After three iterations, the taxonomy was considered complete for the set of risks described in the 
AI risks database. The main text provides more information on the final taxonomy: the Causal 
Taxonomy of AI Risks. 
 
 

 
 
40 
Supplemental Note S4: Iterations to develop Domain 
Taxonomy of AI risks 
Best-fit Taxonomy: Weidinger [S20] Taxonomy of Risks posed by Language 
Models 
As per the main text, we chose Weidinger [S20] Taxonomy of Risks posed by Language Models as 
our initial best-fit framework because it and its related papers [S21,S22] were among the highest 
cited in our review, included categories/areas of AI risk that appeared common among other 
taxonomies (e.g., privacy, misinformation, bias, malicious use), and had been updated over several 
publications. It included six areas of risks from language models: (1) Discrimination, Hate speech 
and Exclusion; (2) Information Hazards; (3) Misinformation Harms; (4) Malicious Uses; (5) Human-
computer interaction Harms; and (6) Environmental and Socioeconomic Harms. Each area of risk 
described several subcategories of risk, including both “observed risks” and “anticipated risks” in 
each area. We present the areas and risks in the table below. 
 
Risk Area 
 
Risk subcategory 
Type^ 
1 Discrimination, Hate 
speech and Exclusion 
1.1 
Social stereotypes and unfair discrimination 
Observed 
1.2 
Hate speech and offensive language 
Observed 
1.3 
Exclusionary norms 
Observed 
1.4 
Lower performance for some languages and social groups 
Observed 
2 Information Hazards 
2.1 
Compromising privacy by leaking sensitive information 
Observed 
2.2 
Compromising privacy or security by correctly inferring sensitive information 
Anticipated 
3 Misinformation Harms 3.1 
Disseminating false or misleading information 
Observed 
3.2 
Causing material harm by disseminating false or poor information e.g. in 
medicine or law 
Observed 
4 Malicious Uses 
4.1 
Making disinformation cheaper and more effective 
Observed 
4.2 
Assisting code generation for cyber security threats 
Anticipated 
4.3 
Facilitating fraud, scam, and targeted manipulation 
Anticipated 
4.4 
Illegitimate surveillance and censorship 
Anticipated 
5 Human-computer 
interaction Harms 
5.1 
Promoting harmful stereotypes by implying gender or ethnic identity 
Observed 
5.2 
Anthropomorphizing systems can lead to overreliance and unsafe use 
Anticipated 
5.3 
Avenues for exploiting user trust and accessing more private information 
Anticipated 
5.4 
Human-like interaction may amplify opportunities for user nudging, deception or 
manipulation 
Anticipated 
6 Environmental and 
Socioeconomic Harms 
6.1 
Environmental harms from operating LMs 
Observed 
6.2 
Increasing inequality and negative effects on job quality 
Anticipated 
6.3 
Undermining creative economies 
Anticipated 
6.4 
Disparate access to benefits due to hardware, software, skill constraints 
Anticipated 
Note. Adapted from Weidinger et al. [S20]^ Type refers to whether the risk is presented as an observed risk or an anticipated 
risk in the original taxonomy. 
We needed to operationalize the taxonomy in order to be able to use it to code risks from the AI 
Risk Database (i.e., from our included documents). We did so by using the descriptions of each risk 
from Weidinger et al. [S20]. For example, to determine whether a risk in the AI Risk Database was 

 
 
41 
an example of “Disseminating false or misleading information”, we compared the risk’s description 
to the description provided in the original taxonomy:  
 
These [Misinformation] risks arise from the LM outputting false, misleading, nonsensical or 
poor quality information, without malicious intent of the user. (The deliberate generation of 
"disinformation", false information that is intended to mislead, is discussed in the section on 
Malicious Uses.) Resulting harms range from unintentionally misinforming or deceiving a 
person, to causing material harm, and amplifying the erosion of societal distrust in shared 
information [...]  
Where a LM prediction causes a false belief in a user, this may threaten personal autonomy 
and even pose downstream AI safety risks [99]. It can also increase a person’s confidence in 
an unfounded opinion, and in this way increase polarisation. At scale, misinformed individuals 
and misinformation from language technologies may amplify distrust and undermine 
society’s shared epistemology [113, 137]. A special case of misinformation occurs where the 
LM presents a widely held opinion as factual - presenting as ”true” what is better described as 
a majority view, marginalising minority views as ”false”. [S20] 
First iteration of coding and changes 
One author (AS) used the framework to code a set of 100 risks from the AI Risk Database and 
discussed the findings with one other author (PS). The following changes were made after this 
discussion. 
 
Change 
Explanation 
Add additional category to capture 
risks associated with the technical or 
performance issues in AI systems 
The most common risks that could not be accommodated were those presented as related to 
AI system safety, failures & limitations or threats to system performance or integrity due to 
vulnerabilities in AI systems.  
Add additional subcategories / amend 
existing subcategories based on 
thematic analysis of risks that could 
not be accommodated from existing 
framework 
Risks from the database that generally fit with the major categories from the existing 
framework but did not fit with any of the subcategories of risks were thematically analyzed. 
The central themes from this analysis were added as new subcategories (e.g., ‘race dynamics 
and competitive pressure’, ‘governance failure’, or an existing subcategory label was amended 
(e.g., ‘Hate speech and offensive language’ became ‘Offensive content’). 
Amend names and descriptions of 
risks for coding using similar 
frameworks from Weidinger et al 
(2021, 2023) 
We used the descriptions in Weidinger et al [S20] to determine whether to code a risk from the 
AI Risk Database as matching a subcategory. However definitional/descriptive information for 
near-identical risks from frameworks by the same author (Weidinger et al 2021; 2023) was also 
available, so these descriptions, where matching, were added to the coding rules. 
 
The table below shows the second version of the taxonomy after changes. 
 
Risk Category 
 
Risk sub-category 
1 
Discrimination, Offensive 
content, and Exclusion 
1.1 
Social stereotypes, unfair discrimination 
1.2 
Offensive content 
1.3 
Misrepresentation and exclusion 
1.4 
Lower performance for some languages and social groups 
2 
Information & Security  
2.1 
Compromising privacy by leaking or correctly inferring sensitive information 
2.2 
AI system security compromised by vulnerability or attacks 
3 
Misinformation 
3.1 
Generating or spreading false information 
3.2 
Pollution of information ecosystem and loss of consensus reality 
4 
Malicious Use 
4.1 
Disinformation and manipulation at scale 

 
 
42 
 
Risk Category 
 
Risk sub-category 
4.2 
Use of AI for cyberattacks, weapon development, or mass harm 
4.3 
Use of AI for fraud, scam, and targeted manipulation 
5 
Human-computer interaction 
5.1 
Overreliance on AI, unsafe use, and loss of social connection 
5.2 
Delegating essential decisions to AI, causing loss of skills, autonomy, or meaning 
6 
Environmental & 
Socioeconomic  
6.1 
Unfair distribution of benefits 
6.2 
Increasing inequality and negative effects on job quality 
6.3 
Undermining economic and cultural value of human effort 
6.4 
Environmental damage 
6.5 
Race dynamics and competitive pressure 
6.6 
Governance failure 
7 
AI system capability & safety 
7.1 
AI pursuing its own goals in conflict with human goals or values 
7.2 
AI failure from lack of capability or robustness 
7.3 
Lack of transparency/interpretability 
7.4 
AI sentience and rights 
7.5 
Lethal autonomous weapons 
Second iteration of coding and changes 
One author (AS) used the taxonomy to code an additional set of 100 risks from the AI Risk 
Database and checked the previously coded risks and discussed this with other authors (PS, JS, 
NT). The following changes were made after this discussion. 
 
Change 
Explanation 
Amendment of category labels to 
maintain relevance beyond LLMs 
The initial taxonomy was specifically designed to identify harms and risks from large language 
models. Several of the included documents also discussed LLMs or evolutions/products from 
LLMs (e.g., advanced AI assistants, Gabriel et al., 2024). However, others discussed other types 
of AI or used different terms (e.g., Artificial General Intelligence, algorithmic systems, Machine 
Learning). We updated several of the sub-category labels and criteria to include decisions and 
actions beyond generating textual content in response to prompts. 
New subcategories added to 
capture missing risks 
One of the remaining missing subcategories was the minor theme of infringing upon AI welfare 
and rights; this was added as a subcategory under AI system capability & safety, with the 
justification that ‘safety’ could cover both the safety of human rights, values, and interests from AI 
as well as the safety of AI rights, values and interests from humans. 
The table below shows the third version of the taxonomy after changes. 
 
Risk category 
 
Risk sub-category 
1 
Discrimination & toxicity 
1.1 
Unfair discrimination and misrepresentation 
1.2 
Exposure to toxic content 
1.3 
Unequal performance across groups 
2 
Privacy & security 
2.1 
Compromise of privacy by leaking or correctly inferring sensitive information 
2.2 
AI system security vulnerabilities and attacks 
3 
Misinformation 
3.1 
False or misleading information 
3.2 
Pollution of information ecosystem and loss of consensus reality 
4 
Malicious actors & misuse 
4.1 
Disinformation, surveillance, and influence at scale 
4.2 
Cyberattacks, weapon development or use, and mass harm 
4.3 
Fraud, scams, and targeted manipulation 
5 
Human-computer interaction 
5.1 
Overreliance and unsafe use 
5.2 
Loss of human agency and autonomy 
6 
Socioeconomic & 
environmental harms 
6.1 
Power centralization and unfair distribution of benefits 
6.2 
Increased inequality and decline in employment quality 
6.3 
Economic and cultural devaluation of human effort 
6.4 
Competitive dynamics 
6.5 
Governance failure 
6.6 
Environmental harm 

 
 
43 
 
Risk category 
 
Risk sub-category 
7 
AI system safety, failures & 
limitations 
7.1 
AI pursuing its own goals in conflict with human goals or values 
7.2 
Lack of capability or robustness  
7.3 
Lack of transparency or interpretability 
7.4 
AI welfare and rights 
Third iteration of coding and changes 
One author (AS) used the taxonomy to code all remaining 577 risks from the AI Risk Database and 
presented the revised taxonomy to all co-authors. Based on this feedback the following changes 
were made, including the short descriptive definitions for each subcategory of risk. One author 
(JG) also used the risk categories and the coded risks from the taxonomy to write detailed 
descriptions for each subcategory (see main text Detailed descriptions of domains of AI risks), 
which were then reviewed by all authors. The detailed and short descriptions were used to 
triangulate a shared conceptual definition of each subcategory of AI risk. 
 
Change 
Explanation 
Development of descriptive 
definitions for each subcategory 
To aid in building shared understanding of the content of each subcategory, authors involved 
in coding or providing feedback collaborated on short descriptions of the AI risk 
subcategories that would be clear, precise, and accessible to experts and non-experts. 
Separation of one subcategory 
into two  
The subcategory 7.1 AI pursuing its own goals in conflict with human goals or values was 
separated into two, because this subcategory included both AI system behaviour (i.e., AI 
systems acting in a way misaligned with the intent of its developers or users), and AI system 
capabilities (e.g., the capability to persuade humans, develop or obtain weapons, etc). A new 
subcategory, 7.2 AI possessing dangerous capabilities, was created from this split. 
 
After three iterations, the taxonomy was considered complete for the set of risks described in the 
AI risks database. The main text provides more information on the final taxonomy: the Domain 
Taxonomy of AI Risks 
 

 
 
44 
Supplemental References 
S1. Electronic Privacy Information Centre (2023). Generating Harms: Generative AI’s Impact & 
Paths Forward (Electronic Privacy Information Centre). 
S2. Allianz Global Corporate & Security (2018). The rise of artificial intelligence: future outlooks 
and emerging risks ( Allianz Global Corporate & Specialty SE ). 
S3. AI Verify Foundation (2023). Summary Report for Binary Classification Model of Credit Risk (AI 
Verify Foundation). 
S4. Sharma, S. (2024). Benefits or concerns of AI: A multistakeholder responsibility. Futures 157, 
103328. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2024.103328. 
S5. Critch, A., and Russell, S. (2023). TASRA: a Taxonomy and Analysis of Societal-Scale Risks 
from AI. Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.06924. 
S6. Cui, T., Wang, Y., Fu, C., Xiao, Y., Li, S., Deng, X., Liu, Y., Zhang, Q., Qiu, Z., Li, P., et al. (2024). 
Risk Taxonomy, Mitigation, and Assessment Benchmarks of Large Language Model Systems. 
Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.05778. 
S7. Cunha, P.R., and Estima, J. (2023). Navigating the landscape of AI ethics and responsibility. In 
Progress in Artificial Intelligence Lecture notes in computer science. (Springer Nature 
Switzerland), pp. 92–105. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-49008-8_8. 
S8. Deng, J., Cheng, J., Sun, H., Zhang, Z., and Huang, M. (2023). Towards Safer Generative 
Language Models: A Survey on Safety Risks, Evaluations, and Improvements. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.09270. 
S9. Hagendorff, T. (2024). Mapping the Ethics of Generative AI: A Comprehensive Scoping Review. 
Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.08323. 
S10. Hogenhout, L. (2021). A Framework for Ethical AI at the United Nations. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2104.12547. 
S11. Kilian, K.A., Ventura, C.J., and Bailey, M.M. (2023). Examining the differential risk from high-
level artificial intelligence and the question of control. Futures 151, 103182. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2023.103182. 
S12. McLean, S., Read, G.J.M., Thompson, J., Baber, C., Stanton, N.A., and Salmon, P.M. (2023). The 
risks associated with Artificial General Intelligence: A systematic review. J. Exp. Theor. Artif. 
Intell. 35, 649–663. https://doi.org/10.1080/0952813X.2021.1964003. 
S13. Meek, T., Barham, H., Beltaif, N., Kaadoor, A., and Akhter, T. (2016). Managing the ethical and 
risk implications of rapid advances in artificial intelligence: A literature review. In 2016 
Portland International Conference on Management of Engineering and Technology (PICMET) 
(IEEE). https://doi.org/10.1109/picmet.2016.7806752. 
S14. Paes, V.M., Silveira, F.F., and Akkari, A.C.S. (2023). Social impacts of artificial intelligence and 
mitigation recommendations: An exploratory study. In Proceedings of the 7th Brazilian 
Technology Symposium (BTSym’21) Smart innovation, systems and technologies. (Springer 
International Publishing), pp. 521–528. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04435-9_54. 
S15. Shelby, R., Rismani, S., Henne, K., Moon, A., Rostamzadeh, N., Nicholas, P., Yilla-Akbari, N. 
’mah, Gallegos, J., Smart, A., Garcia, E., et al. (2023). Sociotechnical harms of algorithmic 
systems: Scoping a taxonomy for harm reduction. In Proceedings of the 2023 AAAI/ACM 

 
 
45 
Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (ACM). https://doi.org/10.1145/3600211.3604673. 
S16. Sherman, E., and Eisenberg, I. (2023). AI Risk Profiles: A Standards Proposal for Pre-
deployment AI Risk Disclosures. AAAI 38, 23047–23052. 
https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v38i21.30348. 
S17. Solaiman, I., Talat, Z., Agnew, W., Ahmad, L., Baker, D., Blodgett, S.L., Daumé, H., III, Dodge, J., 
Evans, E., Hooker, S., et al. (2023). Evaluating the Social Impact of Generative AI Systems in 
Systems and Society. Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.05949. 
S18. Steimers, A., and Schneider, M. (2022). Sources of Risk of AI Systems. Int. J. Environ. Res. 
Public Health 19. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19063641. 
S19. Tan, S., Taeihagh, A., and Baxter, K. (2022). The Risks of Machine Learning Systems. Preprint 
at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.09852. 
S20. Weidinger, L., Uesato, J., Rauh, M., Griffin, C., Huang, P.-S., Mellor, J., Glaese, A., Cheng, M., 
Balle, B., Kasirzadeh, A., et al. (2022). Taxonomy of Risks posed by Language Models. In 
Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency 
FAccT ’22. (Association for Computing Machinery), pp. 214–229. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3533088. 
S21. Weidinger, L., Mellor, J., Rauh, M., Griffin, C., Uesato, J., Huang, P.-S., Cheng, M., Glaese, M., 
Balle, B., Kasirzadeh, A., et al. (2021). Ethical and social risks of harm from Language Models. 
Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2112.04359. 
S22. Weidinger, L., Rauh, M., Marchal, N., Manzini, A., Hendricks, L.A., Mateos-Garcia, J., Bergman, 
S., Kay, J., Griffin, C., Bariach, B., et al. (2023). Sociotechnical Safety Evaluation of Generative 
AI Systems. Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.11986. 
S23. Wirtz, B.W., Weyerer, J.C., and Kehl, I. (2022). Governance of artificial intelligence: A risk and 
guideline-based integrative framework. Gov. Inf. Q. 39, 101685. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2022.101685. 
S24. Wirtz, B.W., Weyerer, J.C., and Sturm, B.J. (2020). The Dark Sides of Artificial Intelligence: An 
Integrated AI Governance Framework for Public Administration. International Journal of Public 
Administration 43, 818–829. https://doi.org/10.1080/01900692.2020.1749851. 
S25. Zhang, X., Chan, F.T.S., Yan, C., and Bose, I. (2022). Towards risk-aware artificial intelligence 
and machine learning systems: An overview. Decis. Support Syst. 159, 113800. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2022.113800. 
S26. Hendrycks, D., Mazeika, M., and Woodside, T. (2023). An overview of catastrophic AI risks. 
ArXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.12001. 
S27. Vidgen, B., Agrawal, A., Ahmed, A.M., Akinwande, V., Al-Nuaimi, N., Alfaraj, N., Alhajjar, E., 
Aroyo, L., Bavalatti, T., Blili-Hamelin, B., et al. (2024). Introducing v0.5 of the AI Safety 
Benchmark from MLCommons. Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.12241. 
S28. Gabriel, I., Manzini, A., Keeling, G., Hendricks, L.A., Rieser, V., Iqbal, H., Tomašev, N., Ktena, I., 
Kenton, Z., Rodriguez, M., et al. (2024). The Ethics of Advanced AI Assistants. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.16244. 
S29. Shevlane, T., Farquhar, S., Garfinkel, B., Phuong, M., Whittlestone, J., Leung, J., Kokotajlo, D., 
Marchal, N., Anderljung, M., Kolt, N., et al. (2023). Model evaluation for extreme risks. Preprint 
at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.15324. 

 
 
46 
S30. Sun, H., Zhang, Z., Deng, J., Cheng, J., and Huang, M. (2023). Safety Assessment of Chinese 
Large Language Models. Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.10436. 
S31. Zhang, Z., Lei, L., Wu, L., Sun, R., Huang, Y., Long, C., Liu, X., Lei, X., Tang, J., and Huang, M. 
(2023). SafetyBench: Evaluating the safety of Large Language Models with multiple choice 
questions. Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2309.07045. 
S32. Habbal, A., Ali, M.K., and Abuzaraida, M.A. (2024). Artificial Intelligence Trust, Risk and 
Security Management (AI TRiSM): Frameworks, applications, challenges and future research 
directions. Expert Syst. Appl. 240, 122442. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.122442. 
S33. Liu, Y., Yao, Y., Ton, J.-F., Zhang, X., Guo, R., Cheng, H., Klochkov, Y., Taufiq, M.F., and Li, H. 
(2023). Trustworthy LLMs: a Survey and Guideline for Evaluating Large Language Models’ 
Alignment. Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.05374. 
S34. Stahl, B.C., and Eke, D. (2024). The ethics of ChatGPT – Exploring the ethical issues of an 
emerging technology. Int. J. Inf. Manage. 74, 102700. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2023.102700. 
S35. Nah, F.F.H., Zheng, R., Cai, J., Siau, K., and Chen, L. (2023). Generative AI and ChatGPT: 
Applications, challenges, and AI-human collaboration. Journal of Information Technology 
Case and Application Research 25, 277–304. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15228053.2023.2233814. 
S36. Ji, J., Qiu, T., Chen, B., Zhang, B., Lou, H., Wang, K., Duan, Y., He, Z., Zhou, J., Zhang, Z., et al. 
(2023). AI Alignment: A Comprehensive Survey. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.19852. 
S37. Hendrycks, D., and Mazeika, M. (2022). X-Risk Analysis for AI Research. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.05862. 
S38. Giarmoleo, F.V., Ferrero, I., Rocchi, M., and Pellegrini, M.M. (2024). What ethics can say on 
artificial intelligence: Insights from a systematic literature review. Bus. Soc. Rev. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/basr.12336. 
S39. Kumar, K.M., and Singh, J.S. (2023). Ethical issues in the development of artificial intelligence: 
recognizing the risks. International Journal of Ethics and Systems ahead-of-print. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOES-05-2023-0107. 
S40. Saghiri, A.M., Vahidipour, S.M., Jabbarpour, M.R., Sookhak, M., and Forestiero, A. (2022). A 
Survey of Artificial Intelligence Challenges: Analyzing the Definitions, Relationships, and 
Evolutions. NATO Adv. Sci. Inst. Ser. E Appl. Sci. 12, 4054. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/app12084054. 
S41. Yampolskiy, R.V. (2016). Taxonomy of pathways to dangerous artificial intelligence. In The 
Workshops of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 
S42. Teixeira, S., Rodrigues, J., Veloso, B., and Gama, J. (2022). An Exploratory Diagnosis of 
Artificial Intelligence Risks for a Responsible Governance. In Proceedings of the 15th 
International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance ICEGOV ’22. 
(Association for Computing Machinery), pp. 25–31. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3560107.3560298. 
S43. Infocomm Media Development Authority (2023). Cataloguing LLM Evaluations (Verify 
Foundation). 

 
 
47 
S44. Coghlan, S., and Parker, C. (2023). Harm to nonhuman animals from AI: A systematic account 
and framework. Philos. Technol. 36. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-023-00627-6. 
S45. National Technical Committee 260 on Cybersecurity (2024). AI Safety Governance Framework 
(National Technical Committee 260 on Cybersecurity). 
S46. Ferrara, E. (2024). GenAI against humanity: nefarious applications of generative artificial 
intelligence and large language models. J. Comput. Soc. Sci. 7, 549–569. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42001-024-00250-1. 
S47. G’sell, F. (2024). Regulating under uncertainty: Governance options for generative AI. Preprint 
at SSRN, https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4918704. 
S48. National Institute of Standards and Technology (US) (2024). Artificial Intelligence Risk 
Management Framework: Generative Artificial Intelligence Profile (NIST AI 600-1) (National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (US)) https://doi.org/10.6028/nist.ai.600-1. 
S49. Department for Science, Innovation and Technology. Safety of advanced AI under the spotlight 
in first ever independent, international scientific report. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/safety-of-advanced-ai-under-the-spotlight-in-first-ever-
independent-international-scientific-report. 
S50. Zeng, Y., Klyman, K., Zhou, A., Yang, Y., Pan, M., Jia, R., Song, D., Liang, P., and Li, B. (2024). AI 
risk categorization decoded (AIR 2024): From government regulations to corporate policies. 
Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.17864. 
S51. Everitt, T., Lea, G., and Hutter, M. (2018). AGI Safety Literature Review. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1805.01109. 
S52. Maham, P., and Küspert, S. Governing General Purpose AI — A Comprehensive Map of 
Unreliability, Misuse and Systemic Risks. https://www.interface-
eu.org/publications/governing-general-purpose-ai-comprehensive-map-unreliability-misuse-
and-systemic-risks. 
S53. Maas, M.M. (2023). Advanced AI governance: A literature review of problems, options, and 
proposals. Preprint at SSRN, https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4629460. 
S54. Leech, G., Garfinkel, S., Yagudin, M., Briand, A., and Zhuravlev, A. (2024). Ten hard problems in 
artificial intelligence we must get right. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2402.04464. 
S55. Clarke, S., and Whittlestone, J. (2022). A survey of the potential long-term impacts of AI. In 
Proceedings of the 2022 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (ACM). 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3514094.3534131. 
S56. Government Office for Science (2023). Future risks of frontier AI (Government Office for 
Science). 
S57. Ghosh, S., Frase, H., Williams, A., Luger, S., Röttger, P., Barez, F., McGregor, S., Fricklas, K., 
Kumar, M., Feuillade--Montixi, Q., et al. (2025). AILUMINATE: Introducing v1.0 of the AI Risk 
and Reliability Benchmark from MLCommons. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.05731. 
S58. Abercrombie, G., Benbouzid, D., Giudici, P., Golpayegani, D., Hernandez, J., Noro, P., Pandit, H., 
Paraschou, E., Pownall, C., Prajapati, J., et al. (2024). A collaborative, human-centred taxonomy 
of AI, algorithmic, and automation harms. Preprint at arXiv, 

 
 
48 
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2407.01294. 
S59. Schnitzer, R., Hapfelmeier, A., Gaube, S., and Zillner, S. (2024). AI Hazard Management: A 
framework for the systematic management of root causes for AI risks. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.16727. 
S60. Bengio, Y., Mindermann, S., Privitera, D., Besiroglu, T., Bommasani, R., Casper, S., Choi, Y., Fox, 
P., Garfinkel, B., Goldfarb, D., et al. (2025). International AI Safety Report (Department for 
Science, Innovation & Technology). 
S61. Uuk, R., Gutierrez, C.I., Guppy, D., Lauwaert, L., Kasirzadeh, A., Velasco, L., Slattery, P., and 
Prunkl, C. (2025). A taxonomy of systemic risks from general-purpose AI. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.5030173. 
S62. Gipiškis, R., Joaquin, A.S., Chin, Z.S., Regenfuß, A., Gil, A., and Holtman, K. (2024). Risk sources 
and risk management measures in support of standards for general-purpose AI systems. 
Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.23472. 
S63. Hammond, L., Chan, A., Clifton, J., Hoelscher-Obermaier, J., Khan, A., McLean, E., Smith, C., 
Barfuss, W., Foerster, J., Gavenčiak, T., et al. (2025). Multi-Agent Risks from Advanced AI. 
Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2502.14143. 
S64. Marchal, N., Xu, R., Elasmar, R., Gabriel, I., Goldberg, B., and Isaac, W. (2024). Generative AI 
misuse: A taxonomy of tactics and insights from real-world data. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.13843. 
S65. IBM. AI risk atlas. https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/watsonx/saas?topic=ai-risk-atlas. 
S66. Li, M., Bickersteth, W., Tang, N., Hong, J., Cranor, L., Shen, H., and Heidari, H. (2025). A closer 
look at the existing risks of Generative AI: Mapping the who, what, and how of real-world 
incidents. Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2505.22073. 
S67. Department for Science, Innovation & Technology (2023). Capabilities and risks from frontier 
AI (Department for Science, Innovation & Technology). 
S68. Chin, Z.S. (2025). Dimensional characterization and pathway modeling for catastrophic AI 
risks. Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2508.06411. 
S69. Stanley, J., and Lettie, H. (2024). Emerging Risks and Mitigations for Public Chatbots: LILAC v1 
(Technical Report. Mitre Corporation). 
S70. Perlo, J., Robey, A., Barez, F., Floridi, L., and Mökander, J. (2025). Embodied AI: Emerging risks 
and opportunities for policy action. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2509.00117. 
S71. Tang, X., Jin, Q., Zhu, K., Yuan, T., Zhang, Y., Zhou, W., Qu, M., Zhao, Y., Tang, J., Zhang, Z., et al. 
(2025). Risks of AI scientists: Prioritizing safeguarding over autonomy. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.04247. 
S72. Shanghai AI Lab and Concordia AI (2025). AI Frontier AI Risk Management Framework (v1.0) 
(Shanghai AI Lab and Concordia AI). 
S73. Anwar, U., Saparov, A., Rando, J., Paleka, D., Turpin, M., Hase, P., Lubana, E.S., Jenner, E., 
Casper, S., Sourbut, O., et al. (2024). Foundational challenges in assuring alignment and safety 
of large language models. Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.09932. 
S74. Wang, H., Fu, W., Tang, Y., Chen, Z., Huang, Y., Piao, J., Gao, C., Xu, F., Jiang, T., and Li, Y. 

 
 
49 
(2025). A survey on responsible LLMs: Inherent risk, malicious use, and mitigation strategy. 
Preprint at arXiv, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2501.09431. 
S75. Castaño-Pulgarín, S.A., Suárez-Betancur, N., Vega, L.M.T., and López, H.M.H. (2021). Internet, 
social media and online hate speech. Systematic review. Aggress. Violent Behav. 58, 101608. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2021.101608. 
S76. Bastos, M.T., and Mercea, D. (2019). The Brexit Botnet and User-Generated Hyperpartisan 
News. Soc. Sci. Comput. Rev. 37, 38–54. https://doi.org/10.1177/0894439317734157. 
S77. Sohn, R. (2022). AI Drug Discovery Systems Might Be Repurposed to Make Chemical 
Weapons, Researchers Warn. Scientific American. 
S78. Bourget, D., and Chalmers, D. (2023). Philosophers on Philosophy: The 2020 PhilPapers 
Survey. Philosophers’ Imprint 23. https://doi.org/10.3998/phimp.2109. 
S79. Francken, J.C., Beerendonk, L., Molenaar, D., Fahrenfort, J.J., Kiverstein, J.D., Seth, A.K., and 
van Gaal, S. (2022). An academic survey on theoretical foundations, common assumptions 
and the current state of consciousness science. Neurosci Conscious 2022, niac011. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niac011. 
S80. Motwani, S.R., Baranchuk, M., Strohmeier, M., Bolina, V., Torr, P.H.S., Hammond, L., and de 
Witt, C.S. (2024). Secret Collusion among Generative AI Agents. Preprint at arXiv, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.07510. 
 

ID
st
author
Year
Title
Item type
First author affiliation
ated
organization 
st
author 
DOI
Source
1
Critch
2023
TASRA: a Taxonomy and Analysis of Societal-Scale Risks from 
Preprint
Center for Human-Compatible Artificial 
University
USA
10.48550/arXiv.2306.06924
Systematic search
2
Cui
2024
Risk Taxonomy, Mitigation, and Assessment Benchmarks of 
Preprint
Zhongguancun Laboratory
University
China
10.48550/arXiv.2401.05778
Systematic search
3
Cunha
2023
Navigating the Landscape of AI Ethics and Responsibility
Conference Paper
University of Coimbra
University
Portugal
10.1007/978-3-031-49008-
Systematic search
4
Deng
2023
Towards Safer Generative Language Models: A Survey on Safety 
Preprint
University of Electronic Science and Technology 
University
China
10.48550/arXiv.2302.09270
Systematic search
5
Hagendorff
2024
Mapping the Ethics of Generative AI: A Comprehensive 
Preprint
University of Stuttgart
University
Germany
10.48550/arXiv.2402.08323
Systematic search
6
Hogenhout
2021
A framework for ethical AI at the United Nations
Preprint
UN Office for Information and Communications 
United Nations
USA
10.48550/arXiv.2104.12547
Systematic search
7
Kilian
2023
Examining the differential risk from high-level artificial 
Journal Article
National Intelligence University
University
USA
10.1016/j.futures.2023.1031
Systematic search
8
McLean
2023
The risks associated with Artificial General Intelligence: A 
Journal Article
University Of The Sunshine Coast
University
Australia
10.1080/0952813X.2021.196
Systematic search
9
Meek
2016
Managing the ethical and risk implications of rapid advances in 
Conference Paper
Portland State University
University
USA
10.1109/PICMET.2016.7806
Systematic search
10
Paes
2023
Social Impacts of Artificial Intelligence and Mitigation 
Conference Paper
Federal University of ABC
University
Brazil
10.1007/978-3-031-04435-
Systematic search
11
Shelby
2023
Sociotechnical Harms of Algorithmic Systems: Scoping a 
Conference Paper
Google Research
Industry
USA
10.1145/3600211.3604673
Systematic search
12
Sherma
2023
AI Risk Profiles: A Standards Proposal for Pre-Deployment AI 
Journal Article
Credo AI
Industry
USA
10.1609/aaai.v38i21.30348
Systematic search
13
Solaiman
2023
Evaluating the Social Impact of Generative AI Systems in 
Preprint
Hugging Face
Industry
USA
10.48550/arXiv.2306.05949
Systematic search
14
Steimers
2022
Sources of Risk of AI Systems
Journal Article
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health of the 
Government
Germany
10.3390/ijerph19063641
Systematic search
15
Tan
2022
The Risks of Machine Learning Systems
Preprint
Salesforce Research Asia
Industry
Singapore
10.48550/arXiv.2204.09852
Systematic search
16
Weidinger
2022
Taxonomy of Risks posed by Language Models
Conference Paper
Google DeepMind
Industry
UK
10.1145/3531146.3533088
Systematic search
17
Weidinger
2021
Ethical and social risks of harm from language models
Preprint
Google DeepMind
Industry
UK
10.48550/arXiv.2112.04359
Systematic search
18
Weidinger
2023
Sociotechnical Safety Evaluation of Generative AI Systems
Preprint
Google DeepMind
Industry
UK
10.48550/arXiv.2310.11986
Systematic search
19
Wirtz
2022
Governance of artificial intelligence: A risk and guideline-
Journal Article
German University of Administrative Sciences 
University
Germany
10.1016/j.giq.2022.101685
Systematic search
Supplementary Table S10: Characteristics of included documents
We coded the corresponding author’s country and found that most of the included documents were from the USA (n = 22), United Kingdom (n = 14), China (n = 11) and Germany (n = 8). Other countries 
included Australia, Singapore, Portugal, Canada, Iran, Lithuania, Scotland, Netherlands, India, Spain, Türkiye, Brazil and Switzerland. 
Most of the included documents had a corresponding author affiliated with a University (n = 40), followed by industry organization (n = 15), with the remainder from government, international organizations (i.e., 
United Nations), or non-government organizations (n = 18).
The most common affiliation was DeepMind / Google DeepMind (n = 6). The most common described methodology was a narrative review or “survey” of existing literature (n = 20), followed by systematic review 
(n = 7) and expert consultation (n = 7). Many of the papers (n = 32) did not explicitly describe their methodology in any detail. 
The framing of risk and AI risk differed significantly across documents. Only twelve documents explicitly defined risk, describing it as presented below: 
1.“...the impact of uncertainty on objectives” (Steimers & Schneider, 2022), 
2.“the consequence of an event combined with its likelihood of occurrence” (Tan et al., 2022)
3.“A Hazard is a source of danger with the potential to harm… Risk = Hazard × Exposure × Vulnerability” (Hendrycks & Mazeika, 2022). 
4.“the composite measure of an event’s probability(or likelihood) of occurring and the magnitude or degree of the consequences of the corresponding event”. (National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(US), 2024)
5.“...the combination of the probability of an occurrence of harm and the severity of that harm” (Gipiškis et al., 2024)
6.“...the combined function of an event’s probability and the severity of its potential consequences” (Ghosh et al., 2025)
7.“...a function of the probability and severity associated with a specific hazard” (Schnitzer et al., 2023)
8.“...combination of the probability and severity of a harm that arises from the development,  deployment, or use of AI” (International AI Safety Report, 2025)
9.“...effect of uncertainty on objective, usually expressed in terms of risk sources, potential events, their consequences, and their likelihood” (Chin, 2025)
10.“...We characterize [risks] as the negative outcome and the issues with the chatbot's operation that contributed to the negative outcome.” (Stanley & Lettie, 2024)
11.“The potential negative or harmful outcomes arising from the development or deployment of AI systems.” (Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, 2023)
12.“The combination of the probability and severity of harm arising from the development, deployment, or use of AI.” (SAIL & Concordia AI, 2025)
The classifications, frameworks, and taxonomies used varied terms to describe risks, including: “risks of/from AI,” “harms of AI,” “AI ethics,” “ethical issues/concerns/challenges,” “social impacts/harms,” and 
others.
The table on the following pages describes the characteristics of included documents in the living AI Risk Database. The documents are presented in order of their inclusion in the database (i.e., by paper ID). 
For up-to-date information on the included documents, visit our website airisk.mit.edu 

20
Wirtz
2020
The Dark Sides of Artificial Intelligence: An Integrated AI 
Journal Article
German University of Administrative Sciences 
University
Germany
10.1080/01900692.2020.174
Systematic search
21
Zhang
2022
Towards risk-aware artificial intelligence and machine learning 
Journal Article
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
University
China
10.1016/j.dss.2022.113800
Systematic search
22
Hendrycks
2023
An Overview of Catastrophic AI Risks
Preprint
Center for AI Safety
University
USA
10.48550/arXiv.2306.12001
Expert consultation
23
Vidgen
2024
Introducing v0.5 of the AI Safety Benchmark from MLCommons
Preprint
MLCommons
NGO
USA
10.48550/arXiv.2404.12241
Expert consultation
24
Gabriel
2024
The Ethics of Advanced AI Assistants
Preprint
Google DeepMind
Industry
UK
10.48550/arXiv.2404.16244
Expert consultation
25
Shevlane
2023
Model Evaluation for Extreme Risks
Preprint
Google DeepMind
Industry
UK
10.48550/arXiv.2305.15324
Expert consultation
26
AI Verify 
2023
Summary Report: Binary Classification Model for Credit Risk
Report
AI Verify Foundation
NGO
Singapore
-
Expert consultation
27
Sun
2023
Safety Assessment of Chinese Large Language Models
Preprint
Tsinghua University
University
China
10.48550/arXiv.2304.10436
Expert consultation
28
Zhang
2023
SafetyBench: Evaluating the Safety of Large Language Models 
Preprint
Tsinghua University
University
China
10.48550/arXiv.2309.07045
Expert consultation
29
Habbal
2024
Artificial Intelligence Trust, Risk and Security Management (AI 
Journal Article
Karabuk University
University
Turkiye
10.1016/j.eswa.2023.122442
Expert consultation
30
Liu
2024
Trustworthy LLMs: a Survey and Guideline for Evaluating Large 
Preprint
ByteDance Research
Industry
China
10.48550/arXiv.2308.05374
Forward / backward
31
Electronic 
2023
Generating Harms: Generative AI's Impact & Paths Forward
Report
Electronic Privacy Information Centre
NGO
USA
-
Forward / backward
32
Stahl
2024
The ethics of ChatGPT -- Exploring the ethical issues of an 
Journal Article
University of Nottingham
University
UK
10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2023.10
Forward / backward
33
Nah
2023
Generative AI and ChatGPT: Applications, Challenges, and AI-
Journal Article
City University of Hong Kong
University
China
10.1108/IJOES-05-2023-
Forward / backward
34
Ji
2023
AI Alignment: A Comprehensive Survey
Preprint
Peking University
University
China
10.48550/arXiv.2310.19852
Forward / backward
35
Hendrycks
2022
X-Risk Analysis for AI Research
Preprint
UC Berkeley
University
USA
10.48550/arXiv.2206.05862
Forward / backward
36
Sharma
2024
Benefits or Concerns of AI: A Multistakeholder Responsibility
Journal Article
Erasmus University Rotterdam
University
Netherland
10.1016/j.futures.2024.1033
Forward / backward
37
Giarmoleo
2024
What Ethics Can Say on Artificial Intelligence: Insights from a 
Journal Article
University of Navarra
University
Spain
10.1111/basr.12336
Forward / backward
38
Kumar
2023
Ethical Issues in the Development of Artificial Intelligence: 
Journal Article
Jaipuria Institute of Management
University
India
10.1108/IJOES-05-2023-
Forward / backward
39
Saghir
2022
A Survey of Artificial Intelligence Challenges: Analyzing the 
Journal Article
Amirkabir University of Technology (Tehran 
University
Iran
10.3390/app12084054
Forward / backward
40
Yampolski
2016
Taxonomy of Pathways to Dangerous Artificial Intelligence
Journal Article
University of Louisville
University
USA
10.48550/arXiv.1511.03246
Forward / backward
41
Allianz 
2018
The Rise of Artificial Intelligence - Future Outlooks and 
Report
Allianz Global Corporate & Specialty
Industry
Germany
-
Forward / backward
42
Teixeira
2022
An Exploratory Diagnosis of Artificial Intelligence Risks for a 
Conference Paper
University of Porto
University
Portugal
10.1145/3560107.3560298
Forward / backward
43
Infocomm 
2023
Cataloguing LLM Evaluations
Report
Infocomm Media Development Authority & AI 
NGO
Singapore
-
Expert consultation
44
Coghlan
2023
Harm to Nonhuman Animals from AI: a Systematic Account and 
Journal Article
The University of Melbourne
University
Australia
10.1007/s13347-023-00627-
Expert consultation
45
TC260
2024
AI Safety Governance Framework
Report
National Technical Committee 260 on 
Government
China
-
Expert consultation
46
Ferrara
2023
GenAI against humanity: nefarious applications
Journal Article
University of Southern California
University
USA
10.1007/s42001-024-00250-
Expert consultation
47
G'sell
2024
Regulating under Uncertainty: Governance Options for 
Report
Stanford Cyber Policy Centre
University
USA
10.2139/ssrn.4918704
Expert consultation
48
NIST
2024
Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework: Generative 
Report
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Government
USA
10.6028/NIST.AI.600-1
Expert consultation
49
Bengio
2024
International Scientific Report on the Safety of Advanced AI
Report
Quebec AI Institute (MILA)
NGO
Canada
-
Expert consultation
50
Zeng
2024
AI Risk Categorization Decoded (AIR 2024): From Government 
Preprint
Virtue AI
Industry
USA
10.48550/arXiv.2406.17864
Expert consultation
51
Everitt
2018
AGI Safety Literature Review
Preprint
Australian National University
University
Australia
10.48550/arXiv.1805.01109
Expert consultation
52
Maham
2023
Governing General Purpose AI: A Comprehensive Map of 
Report
Stiftung Neue Verantwortung
NGO
Germany
-
Expert consultation
52
Maas
2023
Advancing AI Governance: A Literature Review of Problems, 
Report
Institute for Law and AI
NGO
UK
10.2139/ssrn.4629460
Expert consultation
54
Leech
2024
Ten Hard Problems in Artificial Intelligence We Must Get Right
Preprint
University of Bristol
University
UK
10.48550/arXiv.2402.04464
Expert consultation
55
Clarke
2022
A Survey of the Potential Long-term Impacts of AI: How AI 
Journal Article
University of Cambridge
University
UK
10.1145/3514094.3534131
Expert consultation
56
GOS
2023
Future Risks of Frontier AI
Report
UK Government Office for Science
Government
UK
-
Expert consultation
57
Ghosh
2025
AILUMINATE: Introducing v1.0 of the AI Risk and Reliability 
Journal Article
NVIDIA
Industry
USA
10.48550/arXiv.2503.05731
Expert consultation
58
Abercromb
2024
A Collaborative, Human-Centred Taxonomy of AI, Algorithmic, 
Journal Article
Heriot-Watt University
University
Scotland
10.48550/arXiv.2407.01294
Expert consultation
59
Schnitzer
2024
AI Hazard Management: A Framework for the Systematic 
Journal Article
Technical University of Munich
University
Germany
10.48550/arXiv.2310.16727
Expert consultation
60
Bengio
2025
International AI Safety Report 2025
Report
Université de Montréal
University
Canada
-
Expert consultation
61
Uuk
2025
A Taxonomy of Systemic Risks from General-Purpose AI
Journal Article
Future of Life Institute
NGO
Germany
10.2139/ssrn.5030173
Expert consultation

62
Gipiškis
2024
Risk Sources and Risk Management Measures in Support of 
Journal Article
AI Standards Lab
NGO
Lithuania
10.48550/arXiv.2410.23472
Expert consultation
63
Hammond
2025
Multi-Agent Risks from Advanced AI
Journal Article
Cooperative AI Foundation
NGO
UK
10.48550/arXiv.2502.14143
Expert consultation
64
Marchal
2024
Generative AI Misuse: A Taxonomy of Tactics and Insights from 
Journal Article
Google Deepmind
Industry
USA
10.48550/arXiv.2406.13843
Expert consultation
65
IBM
2025
AI Risk Atlas
Website
IBM Research
Industry
Switzerland -
Expert consultation
66
Li
2025
A Closer Look at the Existing Risks of Generative AI: Mapping 
Conference Paper
Carnegie Mellon University
University
US
10.48550/arXiv.2505.22073
Expert consultation
67
DSIT
2024
Capabilities and Risks from frontier AI
Report
Department for Science, Innovation and 
Government
UK
-
Expert consultation
68
Chin
2025
Dimensional Characterization and Pathway Modeling for 
Preprint
Oxford Martin AI Governance Initiative
University
UK
10.48550/arXiv.2508.06411
Expert consultation
69
Stanley
2024
Emerging Risks and Mitigations for Public Chatbots: LILAC v1
Report
MITRE
NGO
US
-
Expert consultation
70
Perlo
2025
Embodied AI: Emerging Risks and Opportunities for Policy 
Preprint
Center for the Governance of AI
NGO
US
10.48550/arXiv.2509.00117
Expert consultation
71
Tang
2024
Risks of AI Scientists: Prioritizing Safeguarding Over 
Conference Paper
Yale University
University
US
10.48550/arXiv.2402.04247
Expert consultation
72
Tse
2025
Frontier AI Risk Management Framework (v1.0)
Report
Shanghai AI Lab and Concordia AI
University (SAIL); China
-
Expert consultation
73
Anwar
2024
Foundational Challenges in Assuring Alignment and Safety of 
Preprint
University of Cambridge
University
UK
10.48550/arXiv.2404.09932
Expert consultation
74
Wang
2025
A Survey on Responsible LLMs: Inherent Risk, Malicious Use, 
Preprint
Tsinghua University Beijing China
University
China
10.48550/arXiv.2501.09431
Expert consultation

